---
layout: post
title:  Neden "void main" kullanıyoruz ya da C programlamada önemi nedir?
date:   2018-01-04 13:52:00
tags:   C Programlama Linux GCC
comments: true
published: true
lang: tr
---
 

<p class="meta">4 Ocak 2018 - Türkiye</p>

<span class="ui_qtext_rendered_qtext">main is the default entry point of a C (and C++) program. The correct signature of the function is: <code class="prettyprint inline"><code class="language-cpp">int main(int argc, char **argv, char **envp);</code></code><br />and in C++ it&#039;s treated as a special case, defined automatically as <code class="prettyprint inline"><code class="language-cpp">extern &quot;C&quot;</code></code> to keep the symbol name free from name mangling.<br /><br />The compilation of a program consists of two important stages: creating the object files and putting the object files together. When an object file is created (from a .c/.cpp file compiled) it will contain a set of symbols (functions) identified by names, that are offered by that object file. Linking means putting all these symbols together; however the symbol usually called &quot;main&quot; is used to start your program.<br /><br />The <code class="prettyprint inline"><code class="language-cpp">void</code></code> there is a mistake that is ignored by the C language, and it means, usually &quot;returns 0&quot; (the standard leaves this undefined, afaik). The exit code of the program communicates the success (0) or failure (non-zero) of the program run. This can be ignored if you don&#039;t want to use your program in batch scripts, but becomes more important if you need to use it in scripts.</span>


<p class="ui_qtext_para">Neither<b> main()</b> or <b>void main()</b> are standard C. The former is allowed as it has an implicit <b>int </b>return value, making it the same as<b> int main()</b>. The purpose of main&#039;s return value is to return an <span class="qlink_container"><a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exit_status" rel="noopener nofollow" target="_blank" onclick="return Q.openUrl(this, 65849570);" class="external_link" data-qt-tooltip="wikipedia.org">exit status</a></span> to the operating system.</p><p class="ui_qtext_para">In standard C, the only valid signatures for main are:</p><pre class="prettyprint linenums">int main()
int main(void)
int main(int argc, char* argv[])
</pre><p class="ui_qtext_para"><b>int main ()</b></p><ul><li>a function that expects unknown number of arguments of unknown types. Returns an integer representing the application software status.</li></ul><p class="ui_qtext_para"><b>int main (void)</b></p><ul><li>a function that expects no arguments. Returns an integer representing the application software status.</li></ul><p class="ui_qtext_para"><b>int main (int argc, char* argv[])</b></p><ul><li>a function that expects argc number of arguments and argv[] arguments. Returns an integer representing the application software status.</li></ul>

