---
layout: post
title:  Kendi Lisp'inizi Oluşturun - Temel Bilgiler
date:   2018-01-04 14:52:00
tags:   C Programlama
comments: False
---

{{ page.title }}
================

<p class="meta">8 Ocak 2018 - Türkiye</p>

Temel Bilgiler • Bölüm 1
==================

Genel Bakış
--------

* * *

Bu bölümde, C'nin temel özelliklerine hızlı bir genel bakış hazırladım. C'de çok az _features_ var ve _syntax_ nispeten basittir. Ancak bu kolay anlamına gelmez. Tüm derinlik yüzeyin altına gizlenir. Bu nedenle _features_ ve _syntax_'ı şimdi oldukça hızlı bir şekilde ele alacağız ve devam edersek bunları daha derinlemesine göreceğiz.

Bu bölümün amacı, herkesin aynı sayfada olmasıdır. Dolayısıyla, mevcut tecrübeye sahip olanlar, atlamayı ve gerekirse daha sonra geri dönmeyi daha kolay bulabilirken, C'ye tamamen yabancı olan insanlar biraz zaman ayırmalıdır.

Programlar
--------

* * *

C'deki bir program yalnızca _function tanımları_ ve _structure tanımları_'ndan oluşur.

Dolayısıyla, bir kaynak dosya sadece _functions_ ve _types_'in bir listesidir. Bu işlevler[functions] birbirlerini veya kendilerini arayabilir ve bildirilen[declared] veya dile yerleştirilmiş olan herhangi bir veri türünü[data types] kullanabilir.

Diğer kitaplıklardaki[libraries] işlevleri[functions] çağırmak veya onların veri türlerini[data types] kullanmak mümkündür. Bu, karmaşıklığın katmanlarının C programlamasında nasıl biriktirildiğidir.

Önceki bölümde gördüğümüz gibi, bir C programının yürütülmesi daima `main` olarak adlandırılan işlevle başlar. Buradan, gerektirdiği tüm eylemleri gerçekleştirmek için giderek daha fazla işlev çağırır.

Değişkenler
---------

* * *

C'deki işlevler, _variables_[değişkenler] üzerinde değişiklik yapmaktan ibarettir. Bunlar, bir isim verdiğimiz veri parçalarıdır.

C'deki her değişken belirgin bir _type_ sahiptir. Bu tipler[type] kendi tarafımızdan bildirilir veya dile dahildirler. Yeni bir değişken ismini takiben onun tipini yazarak tanımlayabiliriz ve isteğe bağlı olarak onu `=` kullanarak bazı değerlere ayarlayabiliriz. Bu bildirim[declaration] bir _statement_'dır ve C'deki tüm _statements_'leri noktalı virgül ';' ile sonlandırırız.

`count` adında yeni bir `int` oluşturmak için aşağıdakileri yazabiliriz ...

    int count;

veya onu bildirmek ve değerini ayarlamak için ...

    int count = 10;

Here are some descriptions and examples of some of the built in types.

------		-----------
`void`		Empty Type
------		-----------
`char`		Single Character/Byte			`char last_initial = 'H';`

`int`		Integer					`int age = 23;`

`long`		Integer that can hold larger values	`long age_of_universe = 13798000000;`

`float`		Decimal Number				`float liters_per_pint = 0.568f;`

`double`	Decimal Number with more precision	`double speed_of_swallow = 0.01072896;`
-------		-----------------------------------

Function Declarations
---------------------

* * *

A function is a computation that manipulates variables, and optionally changes the state of the program. It takes as input some variables and returns some single variable as output.

To declare a function we write the type of the variable it returns, the name of the function, and then in parenthesis a list of the variables it takes as input, separated by commas. The contents of the function are put inside curly brackets `{}`, and lists all of the statements the function executes, terminated by semicolons `;`. A `return` statement is used to let the function finish and output a variable.

For example a function that takes two `int` variables called `x` and `y` and adds them together could look like this.

    int add_together(int x, int y) {
      int result = x + y;
      return result;
    }

We call functions by writing their name and putting the arguments to the function in parentheses, separated by commas. For example to call the above function and store the result in a variable `added` we would write the following.

    int added = add_together(10, 18);

Structure Declarations
----------------------

* * *

Structures are used to declare new _types_. Structures are several variables bundled together into a single package.

We can use structure to represent more complex data types. For example to represent a point in 2D space we could create a structure called `point` that packs together two `float` (decimal) values called `x` and `y`. To declare structures we can use the `struct` keyword in conjunction with the `typedef` keyword. Our declaration would look like this.

    typedef struct {
      float x;
      float y;
    } point;

We should place this definition above any functions that wish to use it. This type is no different to the built in types, and we can use it in all the same ways. To access an individual field we use a dot `.`, followed by the name of the field, such as `x`.

    point p;
    p.x = 0.1;
    p.y = 10.0;
    
    float length = sqrt(p.x * p.x + p.y * p.y);
    

Pointers
--------

* * *

A pointer is a variation on a normal type where the type name is suffixed with an asterisk. For example we could declare a _pointer to an integer_ by writing `int*`. We already saw a pointer type `char** argv`. This is a _pointer to pointers to characters_, and is used as input to `main` function.

Pointers are used for a whole number of different things such as for strings or lists. These are a difficult part of C and will be explained in much greater detail in later chapters. We won't make use of them for a while, so for now it is good to simply know they exist, and how to spot them. Don't let them scare you off!

Strings
-------

* * *

In C strings are represented by the pointer type `char*`. Under the hood they are stored as a list of characters, where the final character is a special character called the _null terminator_. Strings are a complicated and important part of C, which we'll learn to use effectively in the next few chapters.

Strings can also be declared literally by putting text between quotation marks. We used this in the previous chapter with our string `"Hello, World!"`. For now, remember that if you see `char*`, you can read it as a _string_.

Conditionals
------------

* * *

Conditional statements let the program perform some code only if certain conditions are met.

To perform code under some condition we use the `if` statement. This is written as `if` followed by some condition in parentheses, followed by the code to execute in curly brackets. An `if` statement can be followed by an optional `else` statement, followed by other statements in curly brackets. The code in these brackets will be performed in the case the conditional is false.

We can test for multiple conditions using the logical operators `||` for _or_, and `&&` for _and_.

Inside a conditional statement's parentheses any value that is not `0` will evaluate to true. This is important to remember as many conditions use this to check things implicitly.

If we wished to check if an `int` called `x` was greater than `10` and less than `100`, we would write the following.

    if (x > 10 && x < 100) {
      puts("x is greater than 10 and less than 100!");
    } else {
      puts("x is less than 11 or greater than 99!");
    }

Loops
-----

* * *

Loops allow for some code to be repeated until some condition becomes false, or some counter elapses.

There are two main loops in C. The first is a `while` loop. This loop repeatedly executes a block of code until some condition becomes false. It is written as `while` followed by some condition in parentheses, followed by the code to execute in curly brackets. For example a loop that counts downward from `10` to `1` could be written as follows.

    int i = 10;
    while (i > 0) {
      puts("Loop Iteration");
      i = i - 1;
    }

The second kind of loop is a `for` loop. Rather than a condition, this loop requires three expressions separated by semicolons `;`. These are an _initialiser_, a _condition_ and an _incrementer_. The _initialiser_ is performed before the loop starts. The _condition_ is checked before each iteration of the loop. If it is false, the loop is exited. The _incrementer_ is performed at the end of each iteration of the loop. These loops are often used for counting as they are more compact than the `while` loop.

For example to write a loop that counts up from `0` to `9` we might write the following. In this case the `++` operator increments the variable `i`.

    for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
      puts("Loop Iteration");
    }

Bonus Marks
-----------

* * *

*   › Use a `for` loop to print out `Hello World!` five times.
*   › Use a `while` loop to print out `Hello World!` five times.
*   › Declare a function that outputs `Hello World!` `n` number of times. Call this from `main`.
*   › What built in types are there other than the ones listed?
*   › What other conditional operators are there other than _greater than_ `>`, and _less than_ `<`?
*   › What other mathematical operators are there other than _add_ `+`, and _subtract_ `-`?
*   › What is the `+=` operator, and how does it work?
*   › What is the `do` loop, and how does it work?
*   › What is the `switch` statement and how does it work?
*   › What is the `break` keyword and what does it do?
