---
layout: post
title:  Word Net Dictionary
date:   2020-07-17 12:00:00
tags:   dictionary
categories: [Dictionary]
comments: false
published: true
lang: en
---


IPA Chart With Sounds

The International Phonetic Alphabet chart with sounds lets you listen to each of the sounds from the IPA. Click on a symbol to hear the associated sound. 

https://www.internationalphoneticalphabet.org/ipa-sounds/ipa-chart-with-sounds/

[Suffixes](http://examples.yourdictionary.com/list-of-suffixes-and-suffix-examples.html) are added to the end of words to make new words. There are two types of suffixes: vowel and consonant. Vowel suffixes include endings such as -ed, -er,-es, -end, and -ing. Consonant suffixes include endings such as -s, -less, -ness, -ment, and -ly.

The following are the basic rules of using suffixes in the English language.

### Rule 1: Double the Consonant

When a word ends in a short vowel sound and a single consonant, you double the last letter. Examples of this rule are:

*   Fat + er = Fatter
*   Flip + ed = flipped
*   Mud + y = muddy
*   Shop + ed = shopped
*   Swim + ing = swimming

When a word has more than one syllable and ends with the letter "l" you will double the "l" when adding the suffix. Examples include:

*   Cancel + ed = cancelled
*   Control + ed = controlled
*   Propel + er = propeller
*   Compel + ing = compelling
*   Fulfil + ment = fulfillment

Keep in mind that the doubling rule does not apply if the word ends in "w," "x" or "y."

### Rule 2: Drop the Final E

When a word ends in a silent letter "e," drop that final "e" if the suffix you are using begins with a vowel. Examples of this rule are:

*   Drive + ing = driving
*   Hope + ing = hoping
*   Make + er = maker
*   Adore + able = adorable
*   Use + er = user

### Rule 3: Keep the Final E

When the word ends in the letters "ce" or "ge," you will keep the final "e" if the suffix begins with the letters "a" or "o." Examples of this rule are:

*   Advantage + ous = advantageous
*   Change + able = changeable
*   Courage + ous = courageous
*   Service + able = serviceable
*   Notice + able = noticeable

You will also keep the final "e" in the following examples:

*   Like + able = likeable
*   Size + able = sizeable
*   Care + ful = careful
*   Use + ful = useful
*   Peace + ful = peaceful

Remember to keep the "e" if using the suffix -ly. For example:

*   Late + ly = lately
*   Rare + ly = rarely
*   Love + ly = lovely
*   Home + ly = homely
*   Definite + ly = definitely

Lastly, you will also keep the "e" at the end of the word if it ends in "ee" or "ye." Examples include:

*   Agree + ing = agreeing
*   Decree + ing = decreeing
*   Eye + ing = eyeing
*   Foresee + ing = foreseeing
*   See + ing = seeing

### Rule 4: Keep the Y

When the word ends with "y" and has a vowel before it you keep the "y." Examples of this rule are:

*   Boy + s = boys
*   Enjoy + ed = enjoyed
*   Play + ing = playing
*   Buy + er = buyer
*   Joy + ful = joyful

Exceptions to this rule are:

*   Pay + ed = paid
*   Say + ed = said

Another time to keep the "y" is if the suffix starts with the letter "i." You cannot have two i's in a row. Examples of this rule are:

*   Worry + ing = worrying
*   Copy + ing = copying
*   Carry + ing = carrying
*   Supply + ing = supplying
*   Marry + ing = marrying

### Rule 5: Change the Y to an I

When the word has a consonant before the "y," you will change the "y" to a letter "i," then add the suffix. Examples of this rule are:

*   Beauty + ful = beautiful
*   Baby + s = babies
*   Army + s = armies
*   Duty + ful = dutiful
*   Happy + ness = happiness

Keep in mind that there are exceptions to this rule, such as:

*   Dry + er = dryer
*   Baby + hood = babyhood
*   Lady + ship = ladyship

### Rule 6: Changing IE to Y

When a word ends in "ie," change the ending to a "y" when you add the suffix -ing. Examples of this rule are:

*   Die + ing = dying
*   Tie + ing = tying
*   Untie + ing = untying
*   Lie + ing = lying
*   Vie + ing = vying

**Expand Your Vocabulary**
----------------------


It may seem hard to master suffixes at first — there is a lot to remember — but they open up your vocabulary to endless expressions of thoughts and emotions. These word endings can give words new meanings or create an entirely new word. Once you understand the spelling rules for adding suffixes, the language possibilities are endless.




**Verb formation**

I. Verbs formed with suffixes

II. Verbs formed with prefixes

I. Verbs formed with suffixes

Suffix Examples

\-ate approximate, calibrate, evaporate, hyphenate, integrate

\-en broaden, harden, lengthen, quicken, soften, strengthen

\-ify identify, justify, modify, qualify, simplify, specify, verify

\-ize computerize, economize, emphasize, globalize, industrialize, magnetize,

modernize, normalize, rationalize, specialize, standardize

Notes:

\- The suffix –ize is also spelled –ise, especially in BE.

\- The verbs advertise, advise, analyse (in AE analyze), surprise are, however, always spelled

with –s-.

**II. Verbs formed with prefixes**

Prefix Examples

co- co-author, cochair, coexist, cofound, cooperate, coproduce

counter- counteract, counterbalance, countercheck, countersign

de- debug, decode, decentralize, decompose, defrost, destabilize

dis- disagree, disappear, disbelieve, discolour, disconnect, discover, disintegrate,

dislike, disqualify

em- embed, embody, empower

en- enclose, encode, endanger, enlarge, enrich, entitle

fore- forecast, foresee, foretell

inter- interact, interchange, interconnect, interlink, international, interrelate

mis- miscalculate, misinform, misinterpret, mislead, mismanage, misunderstand

out- outdo, outnumber, outperform

over- overdo, overestimate, overheat, overreact, overwork

re- rearrange, reboot, recharge, reconsider, redo, re-elect, re-enter, re-establish,

re-examine, reformulate, rewind, rewrite

sub- subcontract, subdivide, sublet

un- undo, unload, unpack, unplug, unscrew

under- underestimate, underline, underpay

Notes:

\- The prefixes usually have a secondary, i.e. weaker stress.

mislead \[,mis´li:d\]

When in doubt, check the stress and pronunciation with a dictionary.

\- Verbs formed with the prefix co- are sometimes hyphenated.

cooperate or co-operate.

\- When the prefix re- expresses repetition of activity, it has a secondary stress. When not,

it has no stress.

re-form \[,ri:´fo:m\] (= form again)

reform \[ri´fo:m\] (= improve, make better)

\- With the prefix re-, the hyphen is used to prevent ambiguity of meaning (see above)

or to indicate pronunciation.

re-elect \[,ri:´ilekt\] NOT: \[ri:lekt\]

Common mistakes:

\- Wrong use of the suffix –ate (analogically with e.g. eliminate – elimination)

Wrong Right

Verb Noun

determinate determine determination

examinate examine examination

simplificate simplify simplification

modificate modify modification

\- Use of the suffix –alize instead of –ize (Czech interference)

Wrong Right

Verb Noun

maximalize maximize maximization

minimalize minimize minimization

optimalize optimize optimization

\- Use of the suffix –ize instead of \-ate

Wrong Right

Verb Noun

automatize automate automation

\- Wrong pronunciation of the sufix –ate used to form verbs, adjectives, and nouns.

Verbs /eit/ Adjectives /ǩ

ǩǩ

ǩt/ Nouns /ǩ

ǩǩ

ǩt/

approximate approximate \-

associate associate associate

elaborate elaborate \-

estimate estimate -

graduate graduate graduate

separate separate -





<html>
{% for image in site.static_files %}
    {% if image.path contains 'WORDS' %}
    <a href="{{ site.baseurl }}{{ image.path }}" alt="image">{{ image.basename }}</a>
    {% endif %}
{% endfor %}

</html>




