---
layout: post
title:  The Miracle in The Atom
description: In the world in which we live, mankind is caught up in a continuous search for the answers to many questions like "what?", "how?" and "in what way?", and can make but little headway in answering them. It is unlikely for man to make his way to the truth unless he asks himself the question why? about the extraordinary order and balance with which he interacts.
excerpt: Why? Once the answer is found, this question is the key to a gate that leads one to a completely different world. It is, at the same time, a slim line that separates those who know from those who don't.
keywords: The Miracle in The Atom Harun Yahya
date:   2021-05-24 12:00:00
last_updated: Aug 29, 2021
tags:  Books
categories: [Books]
permalink: /:categories/:title/
comments: false
published: true
lang: en
---

**THE MIRACLE IN THE ATOM**

To Him is due the primal origin of the heavens

and the earth. When He decides on something,

He just says to it, 'Be\!' and it is.

(Surat al-Baqara: 117)

**HARUN YAHYA**

Ta-Ha Publishers Ltd.

1 Wynne Road London SW9 OBB

Copyright © Harun Yahya 2001 CE

First Published by Vural Yayıncılık, İstanbul, Turkey in November 1999

First English Edition published in March 2001

Second English Edition published in June 2002

Third English Edition published in June 2004

Published by:

Ta-Ha Publishers Ltd.

I Wynne Road

London SW9 OBB

United Kingdom

Website: http://www.taha.co.uk

E-Mail: sales@taha.co.uk

> All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
> stored in any retrivial system or transmitted in any form or by any
> methods, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise
> without the prior permission of the publishers.

By Harun Yahya

Translated By: Mustapha Ahmad

Edited By: Abdassamad Clarke

A catalog record of this book is available from the British Library

ISBN 1-84200-023-3


<span class="underline">www.harun-yahya.net</span>

**CONTENTS**

**INTRODUCTION **

**CHAPTER 1**

The Formation Adventure Of The Atom

**CHAPTER 2 **

The Structure Of The Atom

**CHAPTER 3 **

The Second Step On The Path To Matter:

Molecules

**CHAPTER 4 **

Atoms That Come Alive

**CHAPTER 5 **

Power Of The Atom

**CONCLUSION **

**NOTES**

**ABOUT THE AUTHOR**

The author, who writes under the pen-name HARUN YAHYA, was born in
Ankara in 1956. Having completed his primary and secondary education in
Ankara, he then studied arts at Istanbul's Mimar Sinan University and
philosophy at Istanbul University. Since the 1980s, the author has
published many books on political, faith-related and scientific issues.
Harun Yahya is well-known as an author who has written very important
works disclosing the imposture of evolutionists, the invalidity of their
claims and the dark liaisons between Darwinism and bloody ideologies
such as fascism and communism.

His pen-name is made up of the names "Harun" (Aaron) and "Yahya" (John),
in memory of the two esteemed prophets who fought against lack of faith.
The Prophet's seal on the cover of the author's books has a symbolic
meaning linked to the their contents. This seal represents the Qur'an,
the last Book and the last word of God, and our Prophet, the last of all
the prophets. Under the guidance of the Qur'an and Sunnah, the author
makes it his main goal to disprove each one of the fundamental tenets of
godless ideologies and to have the "last word", so as to completely
silence the objections raised against religion. The seal of the Prophet,
who attained ultimate wisdom and moral perfection, is used as a sign of
his intention of saying this last word.

All these works by the author centre around one goal: to convey the
message of the Qur'an to people, thus encouraging them to think about
basic faith-related issues, such as the existence of God, His unity and
the hereafter, and to display the decrepit foundations and perverted
works of godless systems.

Harun Yahya enjoys a wide readership in many countries, from India to
America, England to Indonesia, Poland to Bosnia, and Spain to Brazil.
Some of his books are available in English, French, German, Italian,
Spanish, Portuguese, Urdu, Arabic, Albanian, Russian, Serbo-Croat
(Bosnian), Polish, Malay, Uygur Turkish, and Indonesian, and they have
been enjoyed by readers all over the world.

Greatly appreciated all around the world, these works have been
instrumental in many people putting their faith in God and in many
others gaining a deeper insight into their faith. The wisdom, and the
sincere and easy-to-understand style employed give these books a
distinct touch which directly strikes any one who reads or examines
them. Immune to objections, these works are characterised by their
features of rapid effectiveness, definite results and irrefutability. It
is unlikely that those who read these books and give a serious thought
to them can any longer sincerely advocate the materialistic philosophy,
atheism and any other perverted ideology or philosophy. Even if they
continue to advocate, this will be only a sentimental insistence since
these books have refuted these ideologies from their very basis. All
contemporary movements of denial are ideologically defeated today,
thanks to the collection of books written by Harun Yahya.

There is no doubt that these features result from the wisdom and
lucidity of the Qur'an. The author certainly does not feel proud of
himself; he merely intends to serve as a means in one's search for God's
right path. Furthermore, no material gain is sought in the publication
of these works.

Considering these facts, those who encourage people to read these books,
which open the "eyes" of the heart and guide them in becoming more
devoted servants of God, render an invaluable service.

Meanwhile, it would just be a waste of time and energy to propagate
other books which create confusion in peoples' minds, lead man into
ideological chaos, and which, clearly have no strong and precise effects
in removing the doubts in peoples' hearts, as also verified from
previous experience. It is apparent that it is impossible for books
devised to emphasize the author's literary power rather than the noble
goal of saving people from loss of faith, to have such a great effect.
Those who doubt this can readily see that the sole aim of Harun Yahya's
books is to overcome disbelief and to disseminate the moral values of
the Qur'an. The success, impact and sincerity this service has attained
are manifest in the reader's conviction.

One point needs to be kept in mind: The main reason for the continuing
cruelty and conflict, and all the ordeals the majority of people undergo
is the ideological prevalence of disbelief. These things can only come
to an end with the ideological defeat of disbelief and by ensuring that
everybody knows about the wonders of creation and Qur'anic morality, so
that people can live by it. Considering the state of the world today,
which forces people into the downward spiral of violence, corruption and
conflict, it is clear that this service has to be provided more speedily
and effectively. Otherwise, it may be too late.

It is no exaggeration to say that the collection of books by Harun Yahya
have assumed this leading role. By the Will of God, these books will be
the means through which people in the 21st century will attain the peace
and bliss, justice and happiness promised in the Qur'an.

**TO THE READER**

In all the books by the author, faith-related issues are explained in
the light of the Qur'anic verses and people are invited to learn God's
words and to live by them. All the subjects that concern God's verses
are explained in such a way as to leave no room for doubt or question
marks in the reader's mind. The sincere, plain and fluent style employed
ensures that everyone of every age and from every social group can
easily understand the books. This effective and lucid narrative makes it
possible to read them in a single sitting. Even those who rigorously
reject spirituality are influenced by the facts recounted in these books
and cannot refute the truthfulness of their contents.

This book and all the other works of the author can be read individually
or discussed in a group at a time of conversation. Those readers who are
willing to profit from the books will find discussion very useful in the
sense that they will be able to relate their own reflections and
experiences to one another.

In addition, it will be a great service to the religion to contribute to
the presentation and reading of these books, which are written solely
for the good pleasure of God. All the books of the author are extremely
convincing. For this reason, for those who want to communicate the
religion to other people, one of the most effective methods is to
encourage them to read these books.

It is hoped that the reader will take time to look through the review of
other books on the final pages of the book, and appreciate the rich
source of material on faith-related issues, which are very useful and a
pleasure to read.

In these books, you will not find, as in some other books, the personal
views of the author, explanations based on dubious sources, styles that
are unobservant of the respect and reverence due to sacred subjects, nor
hopeless, doubt-creating, and pessimistic accounts that create
deviations in the heart.

INTRODUCTION

**"Why?" **

Once the answer is found, this question is the key to a gate that leads
one to a completely different world. It is, at the same time, a slim
line that separates those who know from those who don't.

In the world in which we live, mankind is caught up in a continuous
search for the answers to many questions like "what?", "how?" and "in
what way?", and can make but little headway in answering them. It is
unlikely for man to make his way to the truth unless he asks himself the
question "why?" about the extraordinary order and balance with which he
interacts.

In this book, we will deal with the subject of "the atom", the
groundwork of every animate and inanimate thing. After seeing what
occurs and in what way it occurs with regards to the atom, we will seek
the answers to the question "why?" The answer to this question will take
us to the truth we pursue.

Since the first half of the 19th century, hundreds of scientists worked
day and night to reveal the secrets of the atom. These studies that
uncovered the form, motion, structure and other properties of the atom
shattered the very grounds of classical physics that assumed matter to
be an entity without any beginning or end, and laid the foundation for
modern physics. They also produced many questions.

Many physicists, looking for answers to these questions, finally agreed
that there is perfect order, unerring balance and conscious design in
the atom, as in everything else in the universe.

This truth is revealed in the Qur'an sent down by Allah fourteen
centuries ago. As made clear in the verses of the Qur'an, the whole
universe works in perfect order because the earth, the sky and
everything in between is created by Allah, Who has infinite power and
wisdom.

It is certainly no wonder that everything created by Allah has
extraordinary excellence and runs within a flawless order. What comes as
a real surprise is man's unrelenting insensitivity towards the numerous
miracles he encounters, sees, hears, and knows – including his own body
– and his negligence about the reason "why" these extraordinary
details are presented to him.

Though dwelling on a scientific subject, the purpose of *"The Miracle in
the Atom"* is different from that of conventional scientific books. This
book deals with the "atom", unique in being the building block of both
animate and inanimate objects, with the questions "what?", "how?" and
"in what way?", thereby opening the door to the answer of the question
"why?" Once beyond this door, the superiority of the wisdom and
knowledge of Allah, and His creation will be revealed for all to see:

Allah, there is no god but Him, the Living, the Self-Sustaining. He is
not subject to drowsiness or sleep. Everything in the heavens and the
earth belongs to Him. Who can intercede with Him except by His
permission? He knows what is before them and what is behind them but
they cannot grasp any of His knowledge save what He wills. His Footstool
encompasses the heavens and the earth and their preservation does not
tire Him. (Surat al-Baqara: 255)

CHAPTER 1

THE FORMATION ADVENTURE OF THE ATOM

**T**he universe, whose vast dimension pushes the limits of the human's
comprehension, functions without fail, resting on sensitive balances and
within a great order and has done so since the first moment of its
formation. How this enormous universe has come into being, where it
leads to and how the laws that maintain the order and balance within it
work, have always been matters of interest to people in all ages, and
still are. Scientists made countless researches into these subjects and
produced various arguments and theories. For scientists who measured the
order and design in the universe by using their reason and conscience,
it has not been difficult at all to explain this perfection. This is
because Allah, the Almighty, Who rules over the entire universe, created
this perfect design and this is obvious and clear to all people who can
think and reason. Allah proclaims this evident truth in the verses of
the Qur'an:

In the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the alternation of
night and day, there are Signs for people with intelligence. (Surat Al
'Imran: 190)

Those scientists who ignore the evidence of creation, however, have
great difficulty in answering these never-ending questions. They do not
hesitate to take recourse to demagoguery, false theories without any
scientific basis, and, if forced into a corner, even deceptions to
defend theories that are entirely opposed to reality. Yet, all
developments that have taken place in science recently, up until the
outset of the 21st century, lead us to a single fact: the universe was
created from nothing by Allah, Who possesses superior might and infinite
wisdom.

The Creation of the Universe

For centuries, people searched for an answer to the question of "how the
universe came into being". Thousands of models of the universe have been
put forward and thousands of theories have been produced throughout
history. However, a review of these theories reveals that they all have
at their core one of two different models. The first is the concept of
an infinite universe without beginning, which no longer has any
scientific basis. The second is that the universe was created from
nothing, which is currently recognized by the scientific community as
"the standard model".

The first model, which has proven not to be viable, defended the
proposition that the universe has existed for an infinite time and will
exist endlessly in its current state. This idea of an infinite universe
was developed in ancient Greece, and made its way to the western world
as a product of the materialistic philosophy that was revived with
Renaissance. At the core of the Renaissance lay a re-examination of the
works of ancient Greek thinkers. Thus, materialist philosophy and the
concept of an infinite universe defended by this philosophy were taken
off the dusty shelves of history by philosophical and ideological
concerns and presented to people as if they were scientific facts.

Materialists like Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels vigorously embraced
this idea, which prepared an apparently solid ground for their
materialist ideologies, thereby playing an important role in introducing
this model to the 20th century.

According to this "infinite universe" model which was popular during the
first half of the 20th century, the universe had no beginning or end.
The universe had not been created from nothing, nor would it ever be
destroyed. According to this theory, which also laid the basis for
materialist philosophy, the universe had a static structure. Yet, later
scientific findings revealed that this theory is totally wrong and
unscientific. The universe has not existed without beginning; it had a
beginning and was created from nothing.

The idea that the universe is infinite, that is that it had no
beginning, has always been the starting point of irreligiousness and
ideologies that make the mistake of denying Allah. This is because in
their view, if the universe had no beginning, then there was no creator
either. Yet, science soon revealed with conclusive evidence that these
arguments of the materialists are invalid and that the universe started
with an explosion called the Big Bang. Coming into being from nothing
had only one meaning: "Creation". Allah, the Almighty created the whole
universe.

The renowned British astronomer Sir Fred Hoyle was among those who were
disturbed by this fact. With his "steady-state" theory, Hoyle accepted
that the universe was expanding and argued that the universe was
infinite in scale and without beginning or end. According to this model,
as the universe expanded, matter originated spontaneously and in
quantities as large as required. This theory, which was based on
extremely unworkable premises, and advanced by the sole concern of
supporting the idea of an "infinite universe without beginning or end"
was in direct opposition to the Big Bang theory, which was
scientifically proven closer to a great number of observations. Hoyle
and others continued to resist this but all scientific development
worked against them.

The Expansion of the Universe and the Big Bang

In the 20th century, great strides were made in the field of astronomy.
First, the Russian physicist Alexandre Friedmann discovered in 1922 that
the universe did not have a static structure. Starting out from
Einstein's theory of relativity, Friedmann calculated that even a tiny
impulse might cause the universe to expand or contract. Georges
Lemaître, one of the most famous astronomers of Belgium, was the first
to recognise the importance of this calculation. These calculations led
him to conclude that the universe had a beginning and that it was
continuously expanding right from the outset. There was another very
important point Lemaître raised: according to him, there should be a
radiation surplus left over from the big bang and this could be traced.
Lemaître was confident that his explanations were true although they
initially did not find much support in the scientific community.
Meanwhile, further evidence that the universe was expanding began to
pile up. At that time, observing a number of stars through his huge
telescope, the American astronomer Edwin Hubble discovered that the
stars emitted a red shifted light depending on their distances. With
this discovery, which he made at the California Mount Wilson
Observatory, Hubble challenged all scientists who put forward and
defended the steady state theory, and shook the very basis of the model
of the universe held until then.

Hubble's findings depended on the physical rule that the spectra of
light beams travelling towards the point of observation tend towards
violet while the spectra of light beams moving away from the point of
observation tend towards red. This showed that the celestial bodies
observed from the Californian Mount Wilson Observatory were moving away
from the earth. Further observation revealed that the stars and galaxies
weren't just racing away from us; they were racing away from each other
as well. This movement of celestial bodies proved once more that the
universe is expanding. In *Stephen Hawking's Universe*, David Filkin
relates an interesting point about these developments:

…Within two years, Lemaître heard the news he had scarcely dared hope
for. Hubble had observed that the light from galaxies was red shifted,
and, according to Doppler effect, this had to mean the universe was
expanding. Now it was only a matter of time. Einstein was interested in
Hubble's work anyway and resolved to visit him at the Mount Wilson
Observatory. Lemaître arranged to give a lecture at the California
Institute of Technology at the same time, and managed to corner Einstein
and Hubble together. He argued his "primeval atom" theory carefully,
step by step, suggesting that the whole universe had been created "on a
day which had no yesterday." Painstakingly he worked through all the
mathematics. When he had finished he could not believe his ears.
Einstein stood up and announced that what he had just heard was "the
most beautiful and satisfying interpretation I have listened to" and
went on to confess that creating the "cosmological constant" was "the
biggest blunder" of his life.1

The truth that made Einstein, who is considered one of the most
important scientists in history, jump to his feet was the fact that the
universe has a beginning.

Further observations on the expansion of the universe gave way to new
arguments. Starting from this point, scientists ended up with a model of
a universe that became smaller as one went back in time, eventually
contracting and converging at a single point, as Lemaître had argued.
The conclusion to be derived from this model is that at some point in
time, all matter in the universe was crushed together in a single
point-mass that had "zero volume" because of its immense gravitational
force. Our universe came into being as the result of the explosion of
this point-mass that had zero volume and this explosion has come to be
called the "Big Bang".

The Big Bang pointed to another matter. To say that something has zero
volume is tantamount to saying that it is "nothing". The whole universe
is created from this "nothing". Furthermore, this universe has a
beginning, contrary to the view of materialism, which holds that "the
universe has existed from eternity".

Big Bang with Evidence

Once the fact that the universe started to form after a great explosion
was established, astrophysicists gave a further boost to their
researches. According to George Gamow, if the universe was formed in a
sudden, cataclysmic explosion, there ought to be a definite amount of
radiation left over from that explosion which should be uniform
throughout the universe.

In the years following this hypothesis, scientific findings followed one
another, all confirming the Big Bang. In 1965, two researchers by the
name of Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson chanced upon a form of radiation
hitherto unnoticed. Called "cosmic background radiation", it was unlike
anything coming from anywhere else in the universe for it was
extraordinarily uniform. It was neither localised nor did it have a
definite source; instead, it was distributed equally everywhere. It was
soon realised that this radiation is the relic of the Big Bang, still
reverberating since the first moments of that great explosion. Gamow had
been spot-on, for the frequency of the radiation was nearly the same
value that scientists had predicted. Penzias and Wilson were awarded the
Nobel Prize for their discovery.

It took only eight minutes for George Smoot and his NASA team to confirm
the levels of radiation reported by Penzias and Wilson, thanks to the
COBE space satellite. The sensitive sensors on board the satellite
earned a new victory for the Big Bang theory. The sensors verified the
existence of the hot, dense form remaining from the first moments of the
Big Bang. COBE captured evidentiary remnants of the Big Bang, and the
scientific community was compelled to acknowledge it.

Other evidence had to do with the relative amounts of hydrogen and
helium in the universe. Calculations revealed that the proportion of
hydrogen-helium gasses in the universe is in accord with theoretical
calculations of what should remain after the Big Bang.

The discovery of compelling evidence caused the Big Bang theory to gain
the complete approval of the scientific world. In an article in its
October 1994 issue, *Scientific American* noted that "the Big Bang model
was the only acknowledged model of the 20th century"

Confessions were forthcoming one by one from the names who had defended
the "infinite universe" concept for years. Defending the steady-state
theory alongside Fred Hoyle for years, Dennis Sciama described the final
position they had reached after all the evidence for the Big Bang theory
was revealed:

There was at that time a somewhat acrimonious debate between some of the
proponents of the steady state theory and observers who were testing it
and, I think, hoping to disprove it. I played a very minor part at that
time because I was a supporter of the steady state theory, not in the
sense that I believed that it had to be true, but in that I found it so
attractive I wanted it to be true. When hostile observational evidence
became to come in, Fred Hoyle took a leading part in trying to counter
this evidence, and I played a small part at the side, also making
suggestions as to how the hostile evidence could be answered. But as
that evidence piled up, it became more and more evident that the game
was up, and that one had to abandon the steady state theory.2

Allah Created the Universe from Nothing

With ample evidence discovered by science, the thesis of an "infinite
universe" was tossed onto the scrap-heap of the history of scientific
ideas. Yet, more important questions were forthcoming: what existed
before the Big Bang? What force could have caused the great explosion
that resulted in a universe that did not exist before?

There is a single answer to be given to the question of what existed
before the Big Bang: Allah, the All-powerful and the Almighty, Who
created the earth and the heavens in great order. Many scientists, be
they believers or not, are obliged to admit this truth. Although they
may decline to admit this fact on scientific platforms, their
confessions in between the lines give them away. Renowned atheist
philosopher Anthony Flew says:

Notoriously, confession is good for the soul. I will therefore begin by
confessing that **the Stratonician atheist has to be embarrassed by the
contemporary cosmological consensus**. For it seems that the
cosmologists are providing a scientific proof of what St. Thomas
contended could not be proved philosophically; namely, that the universe
had a beginning. So long as the universe can be comfortably thought of
as being not only without end but also beginning, it remains easy to
urge that its brute existence, and whatever are found to be its most
fundamental features, should be accepted as the explanatory ultimates.
Although I believe that it remains still correct, it certainly is
neither easy nor comfortable to maintain this position in the face of
the Big Bang story. 3

Some scientists like the British materialist physicist H. P. Lipson
confess that they have to accept the Big Bang theory whether they want
it or not:

If living matter is not, then, caused by the interplay of atoms, natural
forces, and radiation, how has it come into being?… I think, however,
that **we must…admit that the only acceptable explanation is creation**.
I know that this is anathema to physicists, as indeed it is to me, but
we must not reject that we do not like if the experimental evidence
supports it.4

In conclusion, science points to a single reality whether materialist
scientists like it or not. Matter and time have been created by a
Creator, Who is All-Powerful and Who created the heavens, the earth and
all that is in between: Almighty Allah.

It is Allah who created the seven heavens and of the earth the same
number, the Command descending down through all of them, so that you
might know that Allah has power over all things and that Allah
encompasses all things in His knowledge. (Surat at-Talaq: 12)

The Signs of the Qur'an

In addition to explaining the universe, the Big Bang model has another
important implication. As the quotation from Anthony Flew cited above
points out, science has proven an assertion hitherto supported only by
religious sources.

This truth is the reality of creation from nothingness. This has been
declared in the scriptures that have served as guides for mankind for
thousands of years.

In the only book revealed by Allah that has survived completely intact,
the Qur'an, there are statements about the creation of the universe from
nothing as well as how this came about that are suggestive of
20th-century ideas and yet were revealed fourteen centuries ago.

First of all, the creation of this universe from nothingness is revealed
in the Qur'an as follows:

He (Allah) is the Originator of the heavens and the earth… (Surat
al-An'am: 101)

Another important point revealed in the Qur'an fourteen centuries before
the modern discovery of the Big Bang and findings related to it is that
when it was created, the universe occupied a very tiny volume:

Do those who are disbelievers not see that the heavens and the earth
were sewn together and then We unstitched them and that We made from
water every living thing? So will they not have faith? (Surat
al-Anbiya': 30)

There is a very important choice of words in the original Arabic whose
translation is given above. The word *ratq* translated as **"sewn to"**
means "mixed in each, blended" in Arabic dictionaries. It is used to
refer to two different substances that make up a whole. The phrase **"We
unstitched"** is the verb *fataqa* in Arabic and implies that something
comes into being by tearing apart or destroying the structure of *ratq*.
The sprouting of a seed from the soil is one of the actions to which
this verb is applied.

Let us take a look at the verse again with this knowledge in mind. In
the verse, sky and earth are at first subject in the condition of
*ratq*. They are separated (*fataqa*) with one coming out of the other.
Intriguingly, cosmologists speak of a "cosmic egg" that consisted of all
the matter in the universe prior to the Big Bang. In other words, all
the heavens and earth were included in this egg in a condition of
*ratq*. This cosmic egg exploded violently causing its matter to
*fataqa* and in the process created the structure of the whole universe.

Another matter in the Qur'an that could be interpreted as the expansion
of the universe, which was discovered in the late 1920s. Hubble's
discovery of the red shift in the spectrum of starlight is revealed in
the Qur'an as :

It is We Who have built the universe with (Our creative) power, and,
verily, it is We Who are steadily expanding it. (Surat adh-Dhariyat: 47)

In short, the findings of modern science increasingly point towards the
truth that is revealed in the Qur'an and do not support materialist
dogma. Materialists may claim this all as "coincidence" but the plain
fact is that the universe came into being as a result of an act of
creation on the part of Allah. The only true knowledge about the origin
of universe is to be found in the word of Allah as revealed to us.

Creation of Matter Moment by Moment

As the Big Bang theory showed once more, Allah created the universe from
nothing. This great explosion involves many fine gradations and details,
prodding one to reflection, and these matters unaccountable for by
coincidence.

The temperature at each moment of the explosion, the number of atomic
particles, the forces involved, and their intensity must be of very
precise values. Even if only one of these values was not specified, the
universe we live in today would not be formed. This end would be
inevitable if any one of the abovementioned values deviated by any value
mathematically close to "0".

In short, the universe and its building blocks, the atoms, have come to
exist in the immediate aftermath of the Big Bang after having not
existed, thanks to these balances created by Allah. Scientists conducted
numerous researches to understand the chronology of the events that took
place during this process and the order of the rules of physics in
effect at each phase. The facts all scientists who have worked on this
subject today admit are as follows:

Moment "0": This "moment" when matter and time were non-existent, and
when the explosion took place is accepted as t (time) = 0 in physics.
This means that nothing exists at time t=0. In order to be able to
describe earlier than this "moment" when creation was initiated, we must
know the rules of physics that existed then, because the current laws of
physics do not count for the first moments of the explosion.

The events that may be defined by physics start at 10-43 seconds, which
is the smallest time unit. This is a time frame incomprehensible to the
human mind. What happened in this small time period of which we cannot
even conceive? Physicists have hitherto been unable to develop a theory
that explains in full detail the events that took place at that moment.5

This is because scientists do not have the data required to make the
calculations. The scope of the rules of mathematics and physics is at a
dead-end at these limits. That is, both what went before and what
happened at the first moments of this explosion, every detail of which
rests on highly delicate balances, have a reality beyond the confines of
the human mind and physics.

This creation, which started at before time, has led moment by moment to
the formation of the material universe and the laws of physics. Now let
us take a look at the incidents that occurred with great precision
within a very short time during this explosion.

As mentioned above, in physics, everything can be calculated from 10–43
seconds onwards, and energy and time can be defined only after this
moment. At this point of the creation, the temperature is 1032
(100,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000) K. To draw a comparison,
the temperature of the sun is expressed in millions (108) and the
temperature of some stars much larger than the sun is expressed in
billions (1011). That the highest measurable temperature at present is
limited to billions of degrees reveals how high the temperature was at
10-43 seconds.

When we go one step further than this period of 10-43 seconds, we come
to the point at which time is at 10-37 seconds. The time lapse between
these two periods is not something like one or two seconds. We are
talking about a time lapse as short as one over quadrillion times
quadrillion of a second. The temperature is still extraordinarily high,
at 1029 (100,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000) K. No atoms were yet
created at this stage.6

One more step, and we are at 10-2 seconds. This time period indicates
one hundredth of a second. By now, the temperature is 100 billion
degrees. At this point, the "early universe" has started to form.
Particles like the proton and neutron forming the nucleus of the atom
have not yet appeared. There is only the electron and its antiparticle,
the positron (anti-electron), because the temperature and speed of the
universe at that point only allow the formation of these particles. In
less than a second after the explosion has taken place out of nothing,
electrons and positrons have formed.

From this moment on, the time of the formation of each sub-atomic
particle is very important. Every particle has to emerge at a specific
moment so that the current rules of physics may be established. It is of
great importance which particle is to form first. Even a slight
deviation in the sequence or timing would make it impossible for the
universe to take its current shape.

Let us stop now and do some thinking.

The Big Bang theory provides evidence for Allah's being by showing that
all matter comprising the universe originated from nothingness. It did
even more and showed that the building blocks – the atoms – also came
into existence from nothing less than one second after the Big Bang. The
enormous equilibrium and order in these particles are worthy of note.
The universe owes its present state to this equilibrium that will be
described in more detail in the pages ahead. It is again this
equilibrium that allows us to live a peaceful life. In short, perfect
order and un-changing laws, "the laws of physics", have formed following
an explosion that would normally be expected to create great turmoil and
disorder. This proves that each moment following the creation of the
universe, including the Big Bang, has been designed perfectly.

Now, let us continue looking at the developments from where we left off.

The next step is the moment at which a time of 10-1 seconds has elapsed.
At this moment, the temperature is 30 billion degrees. Not even one
second has elapsed from t = 0 moment to this stage. By now, neutrons and
protons, the other particles of the atom, have started to appear. The
neutrons and protons, the perfect structures of which we will analyse in
the following sections, were created out of nothing within a time period
even shorter than a second.

Let us come to the first second after the explosion. The massive density
at this time again gives a colossal figure. According to calculations,
the density value of the mass present at that stage is 3.8 billion
kilograms per litre. It may be easy to express this figure, termed as
billions of kilograms, arithmetically, and to show it on paper. Yet, it
is impossible to conceive of this figure exactly. To give a very simple
example to express the magnitude of this figure, we can say "if Mount
Everest in the Himalayas had this density, it could swallow our world in
a moment with the force of gravitation it would possess."7

The most distinctive characteristic of the subsequent moments is that by
then, the temperature has reached a considerably lower level. At that
stage, the universe is approximately 14 seconds old, has a temperature
of 3 billion degrees and continues to expand at a dramatic speed.

This is the stage where the steady atomic nuclei, like hydrogen and
helium nuclei, have started to form. One proton and one neutron have for
the first time found conditions conducive to their co-existing. These
two particles, which have a mass straddling the line between existence
and non-existence, have, because of the force of gravitation, started
resisting the tremendous rate of expansion. It is obvious that a
dramatically conscious and controlled process is in progress here. A
massive explosion gives way to great equilibrium and precise order.
Protons and neutrons have started to come together to form the atom, the
building block of matter. It is certainly totally impossible for these
particles to have the power and consciousness to establish the delicate
balances required for the formation of matter.

During the epoch following this formation, the temperature of the
universe has dropped to one billion degrees. This temperature is 60
times the temperature at the core of our sun. Only 3 minutes and 2
seconds have elapsed from the first instant to this one. By now,
sub-atomic particles like photons, protons, anti protons, neutrinos and
anti-neutrinos are abundant. The quantities of all the particles
existing in this phase and their interactions with each other are
extremely critical. So much so that the slightest variation in the
quantity of any particle will destroy the energy level set by them and
prevent the conversion of energy into matter.

Take electrons and positrons for example: when electrons and positrons
come together, energy is produced. Therefore, the numbers of both
particles are very important. Let us say that 10 units of electrons and
8 units of positrons meet. In this case, 8 of the 10 units of electrons
interact with 8 units of positrons and produce energy. As a result, 2
units of electrons are released. Since the electron is one of the
particles forming the atom that is the building block of the universe,
it has to be available in required quantities in this stage so that the
universe may exist. To take up the abovementioned example, if the number
of positrons was more than that of the electrons, then positrons would
be left over instead of electrons as a result of the energy released and
the material universe would never be formed. If the numbers of positrons
and electrons were equal, then only energy would be produced and nothing
left to form the material universe. Yet, this excess in the number of
electrons has been arranged in such a way as to match the number of
protons in the universe in the time that follows this moment. In the
atom that will form later on, the numbers of electrons and protons will
be equal.

The numbers of particles that emerged in the aftermath of the Big Bang
were determined with so precise a calculation, finally leading to the
formation of the material universe. Professor Steven Weinberg remarks on
how critical is the interaction between these particles:

If the universe in the first few minutes was really composed of
precisely equal numbers of particles and antiparticles, they would all
have annihilated as the temperature dropped below 1,000 million degrees,
and nothing would be left but radiation. There is a very good evidence
against this possibility – we are here\! There must have been some
excess of electrons over positrons, of protons over antiprotons, and of
neutrons over antineutrons, in order that there would be something left
over after the annihilation of particles and antiparticles to furnish
the matter of the present universe.8

A total of 34 minutes and 40 seconds have passed since the outset. Our
universe is now half an hour old. The temperature has dropped from
degrees expressed in billions to 300 million degrees. The electrons and
positrons continue producing energy by colliding with each other. By
now, the quantities of the particles that are to form the universe have
been balanced to allow the formation of the material universe.

Once the rate of the explosion slows down, these particles, almost
lacking a mass, start to interact with one another. The first hydrogen
atom forms by an electron settling into the orbit of a proton. This
formation introduces us to the fundamental forces we will commonly
encounter in the universe.

It is no doubt impossible for these particles, which are products of a
design far beyond human comprehension and have distinct structures
resting on extremely delicate balances, to have come together through
coincidence and to act towards the same goal. This perfection leads many
researchers working on the subject to a very important conclusion: it is
a "creation" and there is a matchless supervision of every moment of
this creation. Each particle that is created after the explosion is
supposed to form at a specific time, at a specific temperature and at a
specific velocity. It seems that this system, which runs almost like a
wound-up clock, had been programmed with such fine-tuning before
becoming active. This means that the Big Bang and the perfect universe
that originated as a result of the Big Bang had been designed before the
inception of the explosion and afterwards put into action.

The will that arranges, designs and controls the universe is certainly
that of Allah, the Creator of everything.

This design is observable not only in the atom, but in every object in
the universe, big or small. These particles, which initially dashed away
from each other at the speed of light, not only caused the formation of
hydrogen atoms, but also gave rise to all the enormous systems contained
within the universe today, as well as the atoms, molecules, planets,
suns, solar systems, galaxies, quasars etc., according to a magnificent
plan, and in perfect order and balance. While it is impossible for the
particles required to form an atom to come together by chance and
establish delicate balances, it would be far more unreasonable and
illogical to claim that planets, galaxies, and in short, all systems
that provide the workings of the universe to form by chance and develop
balances by themselves. The will that makes this unique design is that
of Allah, the Creator of the entire universe.

Other atoms formed following the hydrogen atom, which was a miracle on
its own. At this point, various questions come to mind such as "How did
other atoms form? Why didn't all protons and neutrons form only the
hydrogen atom? How did the particles decide which atoms they would form
and in what quantities?" The answer to these questions again takes us to
the same conclusion. There is a great power, control and design in the
formation of the hydrogen atom and all the other atoms that followed.
This control and design exceeds the capacity of the human mind and
points to the fact that the universe is obviously a "creation." The laws
of physics that were established in the aftermath of the Big Bang have
not changed at all during the approximately 17 billion years that have
passed. Furthermore, these laws are based on such precise calculations
that even millimetric deviations from their present values may cause
results upsetting the general structure and order in the entire
universe. The words of famous physicist Prof. Stephen Hawking addressing
this point are quite interesting. Hawking explains that these phenomena
are based on much finer calculations then we can imagine:

If the rate of expansion one second after the big bang had been smaller
by even one part in a hundred thousand million million, the universe
would have recollapsed before it ever reached its present size.9

The Big Bang, which is built on such fine calculations, evidently
reveals that time, space and matter did not come into being
spontaneously, but were created by Allah. It is absolutely impossible
for the events described above to have formed as a result of sheer
coincidence and to lead to the formation of the atom, the building block
of the universe.

Unsurprisingly, many scientists working on the subject have accepted the
existence of an infinite force and its might in the creation of the
universe. The renowned astrophysicist Hugh Ross explains that the
Creator of the universe is beyond all dimensions:

By definition, time is that dimension in which cause-and-effect
phenomena take place. No time, no cause and effect. If time's beginning
is concurrent with the beginning of the universe, as the space-time
theorem says, then the cause of the universe must be some entity
operating in a time dimension completely independent of and pre-existent
to the time dimension of the cosmos. …It tells us that the Creator is
transcendent, operating beyond the dimensional limits of the universe.
It tells us that God is not the universe itself, nor is God contained
within the universe.10

The most important aspect of the Big Bang is that it gives mankind the
chance to understand Allah's power better. The origination of a universe
with all the matter it contains from nothing is one of the greatest
signs of Allah's might. The delicate equilibrium in the energy at the
moment of the explosion is a very big sign directing us towards thinking
about the infinity of Allah's knowledge.

Fundamental Forces In the Universe

We mentioned that the laws of physics in the universe originated after
the Big Bang. These laws are based on the "four fundamental forces"
known to modern physics today. These forces were formed along with the
formation of the first sub-atomic particles at specifically appointed
times in the immediate aftermath of the Big Bang to form the entire
order and system of the universe. Atoms, which make up the material
universe, owe their existence and extremely even distribution across the
universe to the interaction of these forces. These forces are the force
of mass attraction known as the gravitational force, the electromagnetic
force, the strong nuclear force, and the weak nuclear force. All have a
distinct intensity and field of impact. The strong and weak nuclear
forces operate only at the sub-atomic scale. The remaining two – the
gravitational force and the electromagnetic force – govern assemblages
of atoms, in other words "matter." The flawless order on the earth is
the outcome of the highly delicate proportion of these forces. A
comparison of those forces produces a very interesting result. All the
matter that was created and dispersed across the universe following the
Big Bang was shaped by the effect of these forces, which have wide gulfs
between them. Below are the stunningly different values of these forces
shown in international standard units:

These fundamental forces allow the formation of the material universe
through a perfect distribution of power. This proportion between the
forces is based on such a delicate balance that they can cause the due
effect on particles only at these particular proportions.

1\. The Giant Power in the Nucleus: The Strong Nuclear Force

Up to this point, we reviewed how the atom was created moment by moment
and the delicate balances acting in this creation. We saw that
everything around us, including ourselves, is made up of atoms and these
atoms consist of many particles. What then is the force that holds all
the particles that form the nucleus of the atom together? This force,
which keeps the nucleus intact, and which is the most powerful force
defined by the laws of physics, is the "strong nuclear force".

This force ensures that the protons and neutrons in the nucleus of the
atom stay together without flying apart. The nucleus of the atom is
formed in this way. This force is so strong that it almost causes the
protons and neutrons within the nucleus to bind to each other. This is
why the minute particles that possess this force are called "gluon"
meaning "glue" in Latin. The strength of this bond is adjusted very
sensitively. The intensity of this force has been specifically arranged
to provide that the protons and neutrons keep at a certain distance to
each other. If this force had been just slightly stronger, the protons
and the neutrons would bump into each other. If this force had been
slightly weaker, they would be dispersed. This force has just the proper
degree required for the formation of the nucleus of the atom after the
first seconds of the Big Bang.

The Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombings were indicative of how destructive
the strong nuclear force becomes once it is liberated. The only reason
atomic bombs, which will be reviewed in more detail in the chapters
ahead, are so effective is the liberation of tiny amounts of this force
hidden in the nucleus of the atom.

2\. Safety Belt of the Atom:

the Weak Nuclear Force

One of the most important factors maintaining order on the earth is the
balance within the atom. This balance ensures that things do not
suddenly fall apart or emit harmful radiation. The "weak nuclear force"
is responsible for this balance between protons and neutrons in the
nucleus of the atom. This force plays an important role in maintaining
the equilibrium of the nuclei that contain high numbers of neutrons and
protons.

As this balance is maintained, a neutron, if required, may be changed
into a proton. Since the number of protons in the nucleus changes at the
end of this process, the atom changes too and becomes a different atom.
Here, the result is very significant. An atom transforms into a
different atom without disintegrating and continues its existence. This
safety belt protects living organisms against the dangers that would
otherwise arise from particles breaking free uncontrollably and giving
harm to people.

3\. The Force That Keeps Electrons in Orbit:

The Electro-magnetic Force

The discovery of this force ushered in a new age in the world of
physics. It was then understood that each particle bears "an electrical
charge" according to its own structural characteristics and that a force
exists between these electrical charges. This force provides that
particles with opposite electrical charges attract each other and
particles with the same charge repel each other, therefore ensuring that
the protons in the nucleus of the atom and the electrons travelling in
the orbits around it attract each other. In this way, the "nucleus" and
the "electrons", the two basic elements of the atom, stay together.

The slightest change in the strength of this force would cause electrons
to shoot away from the nucleus or to fall into the nucleus. In both
cases, it would become impossible for the atom and therefore, the
material universe to exist. Yet, from the first moment this force
formed, the protons in the nucleus attracted the electrons at the exact
force required for the formation of the atom thanks to the value of this
force.

4\. The Force Holding the Universe Together:

The Gravitational Force

Being the only force we can ordinarily perceive, it is also the one
about which we know least. Commonly known as gravity, this force is
actually called the "mass attraction force". Although it is the least
powerful force compared to the other forces, by it very large masses
attract each other. This force is the reason why the galaxies and stars
in the universe stay in each other's orbits. The earth and other planets
remain in a certain orbit around the sun again with the help of this
gravitational force. We are able to walk on the earth because of this
force. If there were a decline in the value of this force, the stars
would fall, the earth would be ripped from its orbit and we would be
dispersed from the earth into the space. In the case of the slightest
increase, the stars would collide with each other, the earth would run
into the sun and we would be pulled into the earth's crust. These may
seem very remote possibilities to you now but they would be inevitable
if this force had deviated from its present value even for a very short
time.

All scientists doing research on this subject admit that the precisely
determined values of these fundamental forces are crucial for the
existence of the universe.

Addressing this point, the famous molecular biologist Michael Denton
states in his book *Nature's Destiny: How the Laws of Biology Reveal
Purpose in the Universe*:

If, for example, the gravitational force was a trillion times stronger,
then the universe would be far smaller and its life history far shorter.
An average star would have a mass a trillion times less than the sun and
a life span of about one year. On the other hand, if gravity had been
less powerful, no stars or galaxies would have ever formed. The other
relationships and values are no less critical. If the strong force had
been just slightly weaker, the only element that would be stable would
be hydrogen. No other atoms could exist. If it had been slightly
stronger in relation to electromagnetism, then an atomic nucleus
consisting of only two protons would be a stable feature of the
universe-which would mean there would be no hydrogen, and if any stars
or galaxies evolved, they would be very different from the way they are.
Clearly, if these various forces and constants did not have precisely
the values they do, there would be no stars, no supernovae, no planets,
no atoms, no life.11

Renowned physicist Paul Davies states his admiration for the
predetermined values of the laws of physics in the universe:

When one goes on to study cosmology, incredulity mounts. Recent
discoveries about the primeval cosmos oblige us to accept that the
expanding universe has been set up in its motion with a cooperation of
astonishing precision.12

Supreme design and perfect order prevail in the entire universe
constructed on a foundation provided by these fundamental forces. The
owner of this order is, beyond doubt, Allah, Who created everything
flawlessly out of nothing. Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, holds the
stars in their orbits with the weakest of forces, and holds together the
nucleus of the minute atom with the strongest of forces. All forces act
according to the "measures" He has determined. Allah refers to the order
in the creation of universe and the equilibriums "determined most
exactly" in one of His verses:

He to whom the dominion of the heavens and the earth belongs. He does
not have a son and He has no partner in His dominion. He created
everything and determined it most exactly. (Surat al-Furqan: 2)

CHAPTER 2

THE STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM

Air, water, mountains, animals, plants, your body, the chair on which
you sit, in short, everything you see, touch, and feel, from the
heaviest to the lightest is formed of atoms. Each page of the book you
hold in your hand comprises billions of atoms. Atoms are particles so
minute that it is impossible to view one even with the most powerful
microscopes. The diameter of an atom is only of the order of one
millionth of a millimetre.

It is not possible for a human being to visualize this size. Therefore,
let us try to explain it with an example:

Think that you have a key in your hand. No doubt, it is impossible for
you to see the atoms in this key. If you say you must see the atoms,
then you have to magnify the key in your hand to the proportions of the
world. Once the key in your hand becomes as large as the earth, then
each atom inside the key is the size of a cherry.13

Let us give another example to comprehend this minuteness and how
everywhere and everything is full of atoms:

Let us suppose that we want to count all the atoms in a single grain of
salt and let us assume that we are able to count one billion
(1,000,000,000) atoms per second. Despite our considerable deftness, we
would need over five hundred years to count the number of atoms inside
this tiny grain of salt.14

What, then, is there inside such a small structure?

Despite its exceedingly small size, there is a flawless, unique and
complex system inside the atom comparable in sophistication to the
system we see in the universe at large.

Each atom is made up of a nucleus and a number of electrons moving in
orbital shells at great distances from the nucleus. Inside the nucleus
are other particles called protons and neutrons.

In this chapter, we will look at the extraordinary structure of the atom
that constitutes the basis of everything animate and inanimate, and see
how the atoms combine to form molecules and ultimately, matter.

The Power Hidden in the Nucleus

The nucleus is located right at the centre of the atom and is made up of
a certain number of protons and neutrons depending on the properties of
that atom. The radius of the nucleus is about ten thousandth of the
radius of the atom. To express that in numbers, the radius of the atom
is 10-8 (0.00000001) cm, the radius of the nucleus is 10-12
(0.000000000001) cm. Therefore, the volume of the nucleus is equal to a
ten billionth of the volume of the atom.

Since we cannot visualize this vastness (better to say, minuteness), let
us take our example of the cherry. Let us look for the nucleus inside
the atoms that we had visualised as the size of cherries when the key in
your hand was magnified to be the size of the earth. But such a search
would be inconclusive because even at that scale, it is absolutely
impossible for us to view the nucleus, which is still exceedingly small.
If we really want to see it, then we would have to change the scale
again. The cherry representing our atom must again expand and become a
large ball two hundred metres in diameter. Even at this unbelievable
scale, the nucleus of our atom would not become any bigger than a very
tiny grain of dust.15

So much so that when we compare the diameter of the nucleus that is
10-13 cm and the diameter of the atom that is 10-8 cm, we come to the
following result: if we assume the atom to be a sphere, if we wished to
fill this sphere totally with nuclei, then we would need 1015
(1,000,000,000,000,000) nuclei to fill it.16

Yet there is one thing even more surprising than that: although its size
is one ten billionth of an atom's size, the nucleus' mass comprises
99.95% of the mass of the atom. How is it that something constitutes
almost all of a given mass, while, on the other hand, occupying almost
no space?

The reason is that the density comprising the mass of the atom is not
distributed evenly throughout the whole atom. That is, almost the entire
mass of the atom is accumulated in the nucleus. Say, you have a house of
10 billion square metres and you have to put all the furniture in the
house in a room of one square metre. Can you do this? Of course you
cannot. Yet, the atomic nucleus is able to do this thanks to a
tremendous force unlike any other force in the universe. This force is
the "strong nuclear force", one of the four fundamental forces in the
universe we mentioned in the previous chapter.

We had noted that this force, the most powerful of the forces in nature,
keeps the nucleus of an atom intact and keeps it from fragmenting. All
the protons in the nucleus have positive charges and they repel each
other because of the electro-magnetic force. However, due to the strong
nuclear force, which is 100 times stronger than the repulsive force of
the protons, the electro-magnetic force becomes ineffective, and thus
the protons are held together.

To sum up, there are two great forces interacting with each other inside
an atom so small as to be unseen to us. The nucleus is able to stay
together as a whole owing to the precise values of these forces.

When we consider the size of the atom and the number of atoms in the
universe, it is impossible to fail to notice that there is tremendous
equilibrium and design at work. It is crystal clear that the fundamental
forces in the universe have been created in a very special way with
great wisdom and power. The only thing those who reject faith resort to
is nothing other than claiming that all of these came into being as a
result of "coincidences". Probabilistic calculations, however,
scientifically put the probability of the equilibriums in the universe
being formed "coincidentally" at "0". All these are clear evidence of
the existence of Allah and the perfection of His creation.

…My Lord encompasses all things in His knowledge so will you not pay
heed? (Surat al-An'am: 80)

The Space in the Atom

As mentioned previously, the greater part of an atom consists of space.
This makes everyone think of the same question: why is there such space?
Let us think. In simple terms, the atom consists of a nucleus, around
which electrons revolve. There is nothing else between the nucleus and
the electrons. This microscopic distance "in which nothing exists" is in
fact a very large one on the atomic scale. We can exemplify this scale
as follows: if a small marble of one centimetre in diameter represents
the electron closest to the nucleus, the nucleus would be one kilometre
away from this marble.17 We can cite the following example to make this
magnitude clearer in our mind:

There is a great space lying between the basic particles. If I think of
the proton of an oxygen nucleus as the head of a pin lying on the table
in front of me, then the electron revolving around it draws a circle
passing through Holland, Germany and Spain (The writer of these lines
lives in France). Therefore, if all atoms forming my body came together
so close as to touch each other, you would not be able to see me any
more. You would actually never be able to see me with the naked eye. I
would be as small as a tiny dust particle of the size of a several
thousandth of a millimetre.18

At this point, we realise that there is a similarity between the largest
and the smallest spaces known in the universe. When we turn our eyes to
the stars, there again we see a void similar to that in the atoms. There
are voids of billions of kilometres both between the stars and between
the galaxies. Yet, in both of these voids, an order that is beyond the
understanding of human mind prevails.

Inside the Nucleus: Protons and Neutrons

Until 1932, it was thought that the nucleus only consisted of protons
and electrons. It was discovered then that there are not electrons but
neutrons in the nucleus besides the protons. (The renowned scientist
Chadwick proved in 1932 the existence of neutrons in the nucleus and he
was awarded a Noble Prize for his discovery). Mankind was introduced to
the real structure of the atom only at such a recent date.

We had mentioned before how small is the nucleus of the atom. The size
of a proton that is able to fit in the atomic nucleus is 10-15 metres.

You may think that such a small particle would not have any meaning in
one's life. However, these particles that are so small as to be
incomprehensible by the human mind form the basis of everything you see
around you.

Source of the Diversity in the Universe

There are 109 elements that so far have been identified. The entire
universe, our earth, and all animate and inanimate beings are formed by
the arrangement of these 109 elements in various combinations. Thus far,
we saw that all elements are made up of atoms that are similar to each
other, which, in turn are made up of the same particles. So, if all the
atoms constituting the elements are made up of the same particles, what
then is it that makes the elements different from each other and causes
the formation of infinitely diverse matters?

It is the number of protons in the nuclei of the atoms that principally
differentiates the elements from each other. There is one proton in the
hydrogen atom, the lightest element, 2 protons in the helium atom, the
second lightest element, 79 protons in the gold atom, 8 protons in the
oxygen atom and 26 protons in the iron atom. What differentiates gold
from iron and iron from oxygen is simply the different numbers of
protons in their atoms. The air we breathe, our bodies, the plants and
animals, planets in space, animate and inanimate, bitter and sweet,
solid and liquid, everything… all of these are ultimately made up of
protons, neutrons and electrons.

The Borderline of Physical Existence: the Quarks

Until 20 years ago, it was believed that the smallest particles making
up the atoms were protons and neutrons. Yet, most recently, it has been
discovered that there are much smaller particles in the atom that form
the abovementioned particles.

This discovery led to the development of a branch of physics called
"Particle Physics" investigating the "sub-particles" within the atom and
their particular movements. Research conducted by particle physics
revealed that the protons and neutrons making up the atom are actually
formed of sub-particles called "quarks".

The dimension of the quarks that form the proton, which is so small as
to exceed the capabilities of human imagination, is much more
astounding: 10-18 (0.000000000000000001) metres.

The quarks inside a proton can never be pulled apart from each other
very much because the "strong nuclear force" that is responsible for
keeping the particles inside the nucleus together operates here as well.
This force serves as a rubber band between the quarks. As the distance
between the quarks increases, so does this force and two quarks cannot
become more distant from each other than a quadrillionth of a metre.
These rubber bands between the quarks are formed by gluons that possess
the strong nuclear force. The quarks and the gluons have a very strong
interaction. However, scientists have not yet been able to discover how
this interaction takes place.

Research is underway in the field of "Particle Physics" to unravel the
world of sub-atomic particles. Yet, despite all the intellect,
consciousness and knowledge mankind possesses, we have only recently
been able to discover the very basic particles forming everything,
including ourselves. Further, the more we delve into these particles,
the more detailed the subject becomes, leaving us in the lurch at the
limit of the 10-18 m dimension of the quark. So, what lies beyond this
limit?

Today, scientists propound various hypotheses on this subject, but as
mentioned above, this limit is the furthest point hitherto reached in
the material universe. Everything beyond that point can only be
expressed as energy, not as matter. The really important point is that
man finds, in a location that he has only just been able to discover
with all the technological means at his disposal, enormous balances and
the laws of physics already running like a clock. Furthermore, this
location is inside the atom, which constitutes the building block of all
matter in the universe, as well as of human beings.

Man has just started to become aware of the perfect mechanism
functioning without fail in the organs and systems in his own body. His
discovery of the mechanisms of the cells forming these structures goes
back only a few decades. The supreme creation evident in the atoms lying
at the basis of cells, the protons and neutrons in the atoms, and the
quarks in these particle is so perfect as to stagger everyone, be him
believer or not. The basic point to be pondered here is that all of
these perfect mechanisms run in an orderly fashion every second
throughout man's life, without any intervention by him, and totally
outside his control. It is very self-evident fact to everyone who uses
his conscience and wisdom that all of these have been created by Allah,
Owner of superior power and knowledge, and are governed by Him.

Everyone in the heavens and earth requests His aid. Every day He is
engaged in some affair. So which of your Lord's blessings do you then
deny? (Surat ar-Rahman: 29-30)

The Other Aspect of the

Atoms: Electrons

Electrons are particles spinning and revolving around the nucleus of the
atom similar to the earth rotating on its own axis as it also revolves
around the sun. This rotation, like that of the planets, is realised
ceaselessly and in perfect order on paths we call orbits. Yet, the
proportion of the size of the earth and the sun is very different from
the atomic scale. To make a comparison between the size of electrons and
the size of the earth, if we enlarge an atom as big as the earth, the
electron would be in the size of an apple.19

Tens of electrons revolving in an area so small as to be invisible even
to the most powerful microscopes create a very complex traffic inside
the atom. The most remarkable point here is that these electrons
surrounding the nucleus like an armour of electrical charge do not have
even a small accident. In fact, any small accident inside the atom would
cause a disaster for the atom. However, such an accident never takes
place. The whole operation runs flawlessly. The electrons revolving
around the nucleus at the mind-boggling speed of 1,000 km/second never
collide with each other. It is extremely amazing that these electrons,
which are no different from each other, follow separate orbits, and it
is obviously the result of a "conscious creation". If they had different
masses and velocities, it might be natural for them to settle in
different orbits around the nucleus. For instance, the order of the
planets in our solar system follows this logic. Planets that have
totally different masses and velocities are naturally settled in
different orbits around the sun. But the case with the electrons in the
atom is totally different from that of these planets. The electrons are
exactly alike but have different orbits around the nucleus: how do they
follow these paths unerringly, how do they not collide though they have
incredibly small dimensions and move at incredible speeds? These
questions lead us to a single point: the only truth we face in this
unique order and delicate equilibrium is the perfect creation of Allah.

He is Allah – the Creator, the Maker, the Giver of Form. To Him belong
the Most Beautiful Names. Everything in the heavens and earth glorifies
Him. He is the Almighty, the All-Wise. (Surat al-Hashr: 24)

Electrons are small particles, almost two thousandth the size of
neutrons and protons. An atom has the same number of electrons as
protons and each electron bears a negative (-) charge equal to the
positive (+) charge borne by each proton. The total positive (+) charge
in the nucleus and the total negative (-) charge of the electrons cancel
each other and the atom becomes neutral.

The electric charge they carry obliges electrons to obey certain laws of
physics. One of these laws of physics is that "same electrical charges
repel each other and opposite charges attract each other".

First, under normal circumstances, the electrons, all negatively
charged, would be expected to repel each other by obeying this rule and
shoot away from the nucleus. Yet, this does not happen. If the electrons
were scattered from the nucleus, then the universe would consist of idle
protons, neutrons and electrons wandering in the void. Second, the
positively charged nucleus would be expected to attract the negative
charged electrons and the electrons would stick to the nucleus. In that
case, the nucleus would attract all the electrons and the atom would
implode.

However, none of these things occur. The abovementioned extraordinary
escape velocities of the electrons (1,000 km/sec), the repelling force
they exert on each other and the force of attraction the nucleus exerts
on the electrons are based on such precise values that these three
contradicting factors perfectly balance each other. As a result, this
outstanding system inside the atom runs without falling apart. Even if a
single one of these forces impinging on the atom were a little bit more
or less than it has to be, the atom would never exist.

In addition to these factors, if the nuclear forces binding protons and
neutrons in the nucleus to each other did not exist, protons having
equal charges could not even come close to each other, much less bond
together in a nucleus. In the same manner, the neutrons would never be
able to stick to the nucleus. As a result, there would be no nucleus and
therefore, no atom.

All these fine calculations are indications that even a single atom is
not idle but acts under the perfect control of Allah. Otherwise, it
would be inevitable that the universe we live in would end before it
started. This process would backfire at the outset and the universe
would not form. However, Allah, the Creator of everything, the
Omnipotent and the Almighty, established extremely precise equilibriums
inside the atom just as He established all the balances in the universe,
thanks to which the atom continues to exist in perfect order.

Scientists have spent their best efforts over the years to unravel the
secret of this balance established by Allah, and have ended up with
merely appointing certain names to observed phenomena such as "the
electromagnetic force", "the strong nuclear force", "the weak nuclear
force", and "the mass attraction force"… Yet, as mentioned in the
introductory part of the book, no one has given a thought to the
question "Why?" Why do these forces act at certain intensities under
certain rules? Why do the domains that are governed by these forces, the
rules they obey, and the intensity of these forces have such great
harmony?

Scientists were desperate in the face of all these questions because all
they can do is guess at the order in which the events take place. Their
research, however, gave rise to an indisputable reality. Every point in
the universe reveals the intervention of an Owner of intellect and will
Who does not leave even a single atom idle. There is a single power that
holds all forces together in harmony, and that is Allah, Who holds all
the power and might. Allah manifests His might wherever He wills
whenever He wills. The entire universe from the smallest atom to the
endless galaxies is able to continue its existence only by Allah's will
and preservation.

In the Qur'an, Allah states that there is no power but Him and He
announces the punishment of those who, unaware of this, assume that the
powerless beings (animate or inanimate) He created have power and
strength independently of Him, and attribute divine characteristics to
them.

Oh, that those who do evil had but known, (on the day) when they see the
punishment, that power belongs wholly to Allah, and that Allah is severe
in punishment\! (Surat al-Baqara: 165)

So far no scientist has yet been able to explain the cause and source of
the forces in the atom and therefore in the universe, and why certain
forces come into play on certain occasions. What science does is only to
make observations, take measurements and designate "names" for them.

Such "namings" are regarded as great discoveries in the world of
science. In fact, what scientists do is not an attempt to form a new
equilibrium in the universe or build a new system but just an effort to
comprehend and unravel the secret of the evident equilibrium in the
cosmos. What they mostly do is simply observe one of the countless
wonders of Allah's creation in the universe and assigning a name to it.
Scientists detecting a superior system or structure created by Allah are
awarded various scientific prizes, honoured and admired by other people.
In this case, the one who really should be honoured is, without doubt,
Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful, Who brought that system
into being when it was not, furnished it with exceedingly delicate
balances, and endlessly creates extraordinary miracles the like of them.

In the alternation of night and day and what Allah has created in the
heavens and the earth there are Signs for people who fear Him. (Surah
Yunus: 6)

Orbits of Electrons

Tens of electrons, which spin and orbit in an area unobservable even by
the most powerful microscopes, create an extremely complex traffic
inside the atom as we mentioned earlier. This traffic, however, is so
orderly as to be incomparably more orderly than the most systematic city
traffic. Electrons never collide with each other, because each electron
has a separate orbit and these orbits never coincide.

There are 7 electron shells around the nucleus of the atom. The numbers
of electrons in these seven electron shells that never change have been
specified by a mathematical formula: 2n2. The maximum numbers of
electrons that can be present in each electron shell around the atom
have been fixed by this formula. (The letter n in the formula shows the
electron shell number).

That the endless number of electron shells of atoms making up the
universe precisely stick to the same number by obeying the 2n2 formula
indicates order. That no chaos occurs inside the atom although the
electrons move about at incredible speeds is a further indication of
this unique order. This is an order that can by no means be attributed
to coincidence. The only explanation for the existence of this order is
that Allah created everything as a manifestation of His power in an
order and harmony as told in the Qur'an. Allah refers to this order He
created in the verses of the Qur'an:

...Allah has appointed a measure for all things. (Surat at-Talaq: 3)

…He created everything and determined it most exactly. (Surat al-Furqan:
2)

Everything has its measure with Him, the Knower of the Unseen and the
Visible, the Most Great, the High-Exalted. (Surat ar-R'ad: 8-9)

As for the earth, We stretched it out and cast firmly embedded mountains
in it and made everything grow in due proportion on it. (Surat al-Hijr:
19)

The sun and the moon both run with precision. (Surat ar-Rahman: 5)

He erected heaven and established the balance. (Surat ar-Rahman: 7)

As the verses reveal, Allah, the Lord of all the worlds, is He Who
creates everything in perfect proportion, measure and order. This
proportion and measure cover the entire realm of beings from the
smallest sub-atomic particle to the gigantic celestial bodies in space:
solar systems, galaxies and everything between them. This is the outcome
of the endless and infinite might, knowledge, artistry and wisdom of
Allah. Allah introduces His attributes to human beings in the perfect
measure, order, and equilibrium in the beings and systems He creates. He
displays His endless power before our very eyes. This is the truth to
which all scientific research and calculations must lead man.

Wave or Particle?

When electrons were first discovered, they were thought to be particles
like the protons and neutrons found in the nucleus. In the experiments
that followed, however, it was discovered that they display wave
characteristics like light particles, that is, photons. Subsequently,
quantum physicists came to the conclusion that every particle is
simultaneously a wave form with its own distinct frequency.

It is known that light is spread in a way similar to the ripples created
on the surface of water when a stone is throne into a lake. However,
light sometimes bears the characteristic of a particle of matter and is
observed in the form of sporadic, intermittent pulses like rain drops
falling on a window-pane. This same dichotomy was experienced in the
electron as well, which led to great confusion in the world of science.
The following words of Richard P. Feynman, the renowned Professor of
Theoretical Physics, was to lay the whole confusion to rest:

Now we know how the electrons and light behave. But what can I call it?
If I say they behave like particles I give the wrong impression; also if
I say they behave like waves. They behave in their own inimitable way,
which technically could be called a quantum mechanical way. They behave
in a way that is like nothing that you have ever seen before… An atom
does not behave like a weight hanging on a spring and oscillating. Nor
does it behave like a miniature representation of the solar system with
little planets going around in orbits. Nor does it appear to be somewhat
like a cloud or fog of some sort surrounding the nucleus. It behaves
like nothing you have ever seen before. There is one simplification at
least. Electrons behave in this respect in exactly the same way as
photons; they are both screwy, but in exactly the same way. How they
behave, therefore, takes a great deal of imagination to appreciate,
because we are going to describe something that is different from
anything you know about. 21

Because scientists were never able to explain the behaviour of
electrons, as a solution they gave a new name to it: "Quantum Mechanical
Motion". Let us again quote from Professor Feynman who in the following
words states the exceptional nature of that and the awe he feels:

Do not keep saying to yourself, if you can possibly avoid it, 'But how
can it be like that?' because you will get 'down the drain', into a
blind alley from which nobody has yet escaped. Nobody knows how it can
be like that.22

Yet, the blind alley Feynman refers to here is actually not so. The
reason why some people can never figure a way out of this dilemma is
that despite substantial evidence, they cannot accept that these
incredible systems and equilibriums have been brought into existence by
the sublime Creator. The situation is extremely clear: Allah created the
universe when it was not, furnished it with extraordinary balances and
brought it into being without any preceding example. The answer to the
scientists' question "How can it be like that?" that can never be
solved, nor understood, lies in the fact that Allah is the Creator of
everything and that everything exists only by His command "Be\!"

To Him is due the primal origin of the heavens and the earth. When He
decides on something, He just says to it, 'Be\!' and it is. (Surat
al-Baqarah: 117)

The World Full of Colour Whose Gates are

Opened by Electrons

Have you ever thought what it would be like to live in a world without
colour? Try to visualise your body, the people around you, the seas, the
sky, trees, flowers, in short, everything in black. You would never want
to live in such a world, would you?

What makes the earth colourful? How do the colours, which make our world
so extraordinarily beautiful, come into being?

Certain characteristics present in the nature of matter allow us
perceive objects in colour. Colours are formed as a natural result of
certain motions of the electrons inside the atom. You may think "What do
the motions of electrons have to do with colours?" Let's briefly explain
this relationship:

Electrons revolve only in electron shells. We just mentioned that there
are 7 electron shells. Each electron shell has a specific level of
energy, which varies depending on the distance of the shell from the
nucleus. The closer an electron shell is to the nucleus, the less energy
its electrons have, and the farther it is to the nucleus, the more
energy its electrons have.

Each electron shell has "sub-shells", among which the electrons of that
shell continuously move.

An electron needs to receive external energy to be able to travel
outwards between the shells. The source of this energy is the "photon".

In its simplest terms, the photon is a "light particle". Every star in
the universe is a source of photons. The most important source of
photons for our world is, of course, the sun. Photons are diffused
throughout space from the sun at a speed of 300,000 km a second.

When these photons, arriving on earth from the sun, strike the atoms of
objects on earth, the electrons of atoms sometimes begin their travel.
If the electrons that are able to travel by the help of this energy rise
to a higher energy shell and then return to their own shell, they emit a
photon that is to form the colour that will meet our eye. Each one of
these processes summarized in the few sentences above has been
continuing since the outset of creation without fail. Every step runs
under a great plan and to order. If only one part of this interaction
between electrons and photons had not worked, this would cause a
colourless, dark universe.

Let us again list these steps that have to work according to plan and in
order for the formation of a universe with colours instead of a dark
one.

Light coming from the sun to the earth diffuses in the form of photon
particles. These photon particles scattered around the earth strike
atoms of matters.

Photons cannot travel a long way inside the atoms. They strike the
electrons circling the nucleus.

Electrons absorb these photons that strike them.

When the electrons take in the energy of the photons they absorb, they
jump to another shell having a higher level of energy.

These electrons try to return to their original states.

As they return to their own shells, they emit an energy charged photon.

These photons emitted by the electrons determine the colour of that
object.

To sum up, the colour of an object in fact consists of a mixture of
these light particles that are absorbed, then emitted by this object,
and reach our eyes. The colour of an object that does not emit light
itself but reflects the light it receives from the sun depends both on
the light it receives and the change it makes on this light. If the
object illuminated with white light appears "red", this is because it
absorbs a large portion of the mixture that arrives to it from the
sunrays and emits only red. By saying "it absorbs", we mean the
following:

As mentioned before, every shell has sub-shells and electrons travel
between these sub-shells. Each shell corresponds to a specific level of
energy, and electrons carry as much energy as allowed by the energy
level of the shell on which they circle. Shells that are more distant
from the nucleus, have higher energy. When a space for one electron
becomes available in an upper shell, the electron suddenly disappears,
and then re-appears again in that sub-shell with higher energy level.
Yet, in order for the electron to perform this, it has to raise its
energy level to the level required by the shell to which it jumps. The
electron increases its energy level by absorbing (swallowing) photon
particles coming from the sun.

We can make the situation clearer with a few examples. Let us consider
the Morpho Butterfly. The pigments on the butterfly absorb the entire
sunlight re-emitting only the colour blue. When the light particles for
that reflected colour reach the retina in the eye, they are converted to
electrical signals by the cone cells in the retina in such a way to be
perceived as blue and sent to the brain. Eventually, the colour blue is
formed in the brain.

This means that the colour of an object depends on the character of the
light emitted from the light source and how much of this light is
re-emitted by the object in question. For instance, the colour of a
dress is not the same under sunlight and in a store. If an object is
perceived as black by our brain, it means that this object absorbs all
the light coming from the sun reflecting none to the outside. In the
same manner, if the object reflects all light coming from the sun and
does not absorb any of it, then it is perceived as white by our brain.
In this case, the points that need careful consideration are the
following:

1\. The colour of an object depends on the properties of the light
emitted by the light source.

2\. The colour of an object depends on the reaction of the electrons of
the molecules in its structure, as to which light these electrons will
absorb and which they will not.

3\. The colour of an object depends on how our brain will perceive the
photon striking the retina.

Here, let us stop and think once more.

The electrons that revolve at incredible speed around the nucleus of the
atom, which is a matter too small to be seen with the eye, suddenly
disappear from their own shells and jump to another place called a
sub-shell. There also needs to be a space available on the sub-shell for
this leap. They are supplied the energy they require during the process
by absorbing photons. They then go back to their original orbits. During
this action, colours perceivable by the human eye are formed. What's
more, atoms in number expressible in trillions keep doing this every
moment, thanks to which we are able to view an uninterrupted "image".

This magnificent mechanism is not comparable to the operation of any
man-made machine. A clock, for instance, has a highly complex mechanism
in itself, and all the parts of a clock (gears, discs, screws, nuts,
etc.) must be located in the right places in the right way for a clock
to work properly. The smallest problem in this mechanism would impede
the mechanism of the clock. Yet, when we think of the structure of an
atom and how the abovementioned mechanism of the electrons works, the
simplicity of the structure of a clock is better understood. As we said,
the mechanism of the electrons is too complex, perfect and flawless to
be compared to any man-made system. Definitely, a system that has such
mind-boggling complexity and runs so perfectly could not have come about
spontaneously, as a result of coincidence, as claimed by materialist
scientists. Let us now ask the following question: if you saw a working
clock on the ground while walking in a desert, would you think that this
had formed out of dust, sand, soil and stones by chance? Nobody would
think that, because the design and wisdom in the clock are all too
obvious. However the design and wisdom in a single atom are, as we
mentioned above, incomparably superior to those in any man-made
mechanism. The owner of this wisdom is Allah, Who has supreme knowledge,
Who knows, sees and creates everything.

Allah created every 'where' both that which we are able to see and that
which we cannot, with boundless artistry and He gave innumerable favours
to be at our service, whether we are aware of them or not. The subject
of colours about which we previously knew nothing, and felt no need to
learn, has been brought to our attention in all its details and
complexity as science advanced. It is undeniable that scientific
development and progress ought to cause everyone who uses his wisdom and
conscience to believe in the existence of Allah. Nonetheless, people
still exist who ignore the superior artistry and wisdom observable at
every point in the universe. The acclaimed scientist, Louis Pasteur made
an interesting remark on this subject saying "Little science takes you
away from God but more of it takes you to Him".23

As a person learns more about the examples of creation surrounding him,
he grasps much better that Allah encompasses him from every direction,
He directs all affairs in heaven and earth, and holds everything under
control. He understands that his life will certainly be taken and he
will be answerable for everything he has done on earth. As a believer
becomes more acquainted with the innumerable phenomena taking place
around him, his admiration for Allah's knowledge increasingly grows.
This admiration is a very important step on the way to perceiving the
infinite power and might of Allah as much as possible and fearing Him as
required. This is stated in the Qur'an:

Do you not see that Allah sends down water from the sky and by it We
bring forth fruits of varying colours? And in the mountains there are
streaks of white and red, of varying shades, and rocks of deep jet
black. And mankind and beasts and livestock are likewise of varying
colours. Only those of His slaves with knowledge have fear of Allah.
Allah is Almighty, Ever-Forgiving. (Surah Fatir: 27-28)

CHAPTER 3

THE SECOND STEP ON THE PATH

TO MATTER: MOLECULES

**W**hat is it that makes the objects you see in your surroundings
different from each other? What is it that discriminates their colours,
shapes, smells, and tastes? Why is one substance soft, another hard, and
yet another fluid? From what you have read so far, you may answer these
questions saying, "The differences between their atoms do this". Yet,
this answer is not sufficient, because if the atoms were the cause for
these differences, then there would have to be billions of atoms bearing
different properties from each other. In practice, this is not so. Many
materials look different and bear different properties although they
contain the same atoms. The reason for this is the different chemical
bonds the atoms form among them to become molecules.

On the way to matter, molecules are the second step after atoms.
Molecules are the smallest units determining the chemical properties of
matter. These small bodies are made up of two or more atoms and some, of
thousands of groups of atoms. Atoms are held together inside molecules
by chemical bonds determined by the electromagnetic force of attraction,
which means that these bonds are formed on the basis of the electrical
charges of the atoms. The electrical charges of atoms, in turn, are
determined by the electrons on their outermost shell. The arrangement of
molecules in different combinations give rise to the diversity of matter
we see around us. The importance of the chemical bonds that lie at the
heart of the diversity of matter come forward at this very point.

Chemical Bonds

As explained above, chemical bonds are formed through the motion of
electrons in the outermost electron shells of the atoms. Each atom has a
tendency to fill up its outermost shell with the maximum number of
electrons it may shelter. The maximum number of electrons the atoms can
hold in their outermost shells is 8. To do this, atoms either receive
electrons from other atoms to complete the electrons in their outermost
shells to eight, or if they have lesser electrons in their outermost
shells, then they give these to another atom, making a sub-shell that
had previously been completed in their outermost orbits. The tendency of
the atoms to exchange electrons constitutes the basic inciting force of
the chemical bonds they form between each other.

This driving force, that is, the objective of the atoms to raise the
number of electrons in their outermost shells to maximum, causes an atom
to form three types of bonds with other atoms. These are the ionic bond,
covalent bond and metallic bond.

Commonly, special bonds categorised under the general title of "weak
bonds" act between molecules. These bonds are weaker than the bonds
formed by atoms to constitute molecules because molecules need more
flexible structures to form matter.

Let us now, in brief, see the properties of these bonds and how they are
formed.

Ionic Bonds

Atoms combined by this bond swap electrons to complete the number of
electrons in their outermost shells to eight. Atoms having up to four
electrons in their outermost shells give these electrons to the atom
with which they are going to combine, that is, with which they will
bond. Atoms having more than four electrons in their outermost shells
receive electrons from the atoms with which they will bond. Molecules
formed by this type of bond have crystal (cubic) structures. Familiar
table salt (NaCl) molecules are among substances formed by this bond.
Why do atoms have such a tendency? What would happen if they did not
have it?

Until today, the bonds formed by atoms could be defined only in very
general terms. It has not yet been understood why atoms adhere to this
principle. Could it be that atoms decide by themselves that the number
of electrons in their outermost shells should be eight? Definitely not.
This is such decisive behaviour that it goes beyond the atom, because it
has no intellect, will, or consciousness. This number is the key in the
combination of atoms as molecules that constitute the first step in the
creation of the matter, and eventually, the universe. If atoms did not
have such a tendency based on this principle, some vital molecules would
not exist. Yet, from the first moment they were created, atoms have been
serving in the formation of molecules and matter in a perfect manner
thanks to this tendency.

Covalent Bonds

Scientists who studied the bonds between atoms faced an interesting
situation. While some atoms swap electrons for bonding, some of them
share the electrons in their outermost shells. Further research revealed
that many molecules that are of critical importance for life owe their
existence to these 'covalent' bonds.

Let us give a simple example to explain covalent bonds better. As we
mentioned previously on the subject of electron shells, atoms can carry
a maximum of two electrons in their innermost electron shells. The
hydrogen atom has a single electron and it has the tendency to increase
the number of its electrons to two to become a stable atom. Therefore,
the hydrogen atom forms a covalent bond with a second hydrogen atom.
That is, the two hydrogen atoms share each other's single electron as a
second electron. Thus, the H2 molecule is formed.

Metallic Bonds

If a large number of atoms come together by sharing each others'
electrons, this is called a "metallic bond". Metals like iron, copper,
zinc, aluminium, etc., that form the raw material of many tools and
instruments we see around us or use in daily life, have acquired a
substantial and tangible body as a result of the metallic bonds formed
by the atoms constituting them.

Scientists are not able to answer the question as to why electrons in
the electron shells of the atoms have such a tendency. Living organisms,
most interestingly, owe their existence to this tendency.

The Next Step:Compounds

Do you wonder how many different compounds these bonds can form?

In laboratories, new compounds are produced everyday. Currently, it is
possible to talk about almost two million compounds. The simplest
chemical compound can be as small as the hydrogen molecule, while there
are also compounds made up of millions of atoms.27

How many different compounds can an element form at most? The answer to
this question is quite interesting because, on the one hand, there are
certain elements that do not interact with any others (inert gases),
while, on the other hand, there is the carbon atom that is able to form
1,700,000 compounds. As stated above, the total number of compounds is
about two million. 108 elements out of the total of 109 form 300,000
compounds. Carbon, however, forms 1,700,000 compounds all by itself in a
most amazing fashion.

The Building Block of Life: the "Carbon" Atom

Carbon is the most vital element for living beings, because all living
organisms are constructed from compounds of carbon. Numerous pages would
not be enough to describe the properties of the carbon atom, which is
extremely important for our existence. Nor has the science of chemistry
yet been able to discover all of its properties. Here we will mention
only a few of the very important properties of carbon.

Structures as diverse as the cell membrane, the horns of an elk, the
trunk of a redwood, the lens of the eye, and the venom of a spider are
composed of carbon compounds. Carbon, combined with hydrogen, oxygen,
and nitrogen in many different quantities and geometric arrangements,
results in a vast assortment of materials with vastly different
properties. So, what is the reason for carbon's ability to form
approximately 1.7 million compounds?

One of the most significant properties of carbon is its ability to form
chains very easily by lining carbon atoms up one after another. The
shortest carbon chain is made up of two carbon atoms. Despite the
unavailability of an exact figure on the number of carbons that make up
the longest carbon chain, we can talk about a chain with seventy links.
If we consider that the atom that can form the longest chain after the
carbon atom is the silicon atom forming six links, the exceptional
position of the carbon atom will be better understood.28

The reason for carbon's ability to form chains with so many links is
because its chains are not exclusively linear. Chains may be branched,
as they may also form polygons.

At this point, the form of the chain plays a very important role. In two
carbon compounds, for example, if the carbon atoms are the same in
number yet combined in different forms of chains, two different
substances are formed. The abovementioned characteristics of the carbon
atom produce molecules that are critical for life.

Some carbon compounds' molecules consist of just a few atoms; others
contain thousands or even millions. Also, no other element is as
versatile as carbon in forming molecules with such durability and
stability. To quote David Burnie in his book *Life*:

Carbon is a very unusual element. Without the presence of carbon and its
unusual properties, it is unlikely that there would be life on Earth.29

Concerning the importance of carbon for living beings, the British
chemist Nevil Sidgwick writes in *Chemical Elements and Their
Compounds:*

Carbon is unique among the elements in the number and variety of the
compounds which it can form. Over a quarter of a million have already
been isolated and described, but this gives a very imperfect idea of its
powers, since it is the basis of all forms of living matter. 30

The class of compounds formed exclusively from carbon and hydrogen are
called "hydrocarbons". This is a huge family of compounds that include
natural gas, liquid petroleum, kerosene, and lubricating oils. The
hydrocarbons ethylene and propylene form the basis of the petrochemical
industry. Hydrocarbons like benzene, toluene, and turpentine are
familiar to anyone who's worked with paints. The naphthalene that
protects our clothes from moths is another hydrocarbon. Hydrocarbons
combined with chlorine or fluorine form anaesthetics, the chemicals used
in fire extinguishers and the Freons used in refrigeration.

As the chemist Sidgwick stated above, the human mind is insufficient to
fully understand the potential of this atom that has only six protons,
six neutrons and six electrons. It is impossible for even a single
property of this atom, which is vital for life, to form by chance. The
carbon atom, like everything else, has been created by Allah perfectly
adapted for the bodies of living beings, which Allah encompasses down to
their very atoms.

What is in the heavens and in the earth belongs to Allah. Allah
encompasses all things. (Surat an-Nisa': 126)

Intermolecular Bonds:

Weak Bonds

The bonds combining the atoms in molecules are much stronger than these
weak intermolecular bonds. These bonds can help the formation of
millions, and even billions of kinds of molecules.

Well, how do molecules combine to form matter?

Since molecules become stable after their formation, they no longer swap
atoms.

So, what holds them together?

In an effort to answer this question, chemists produced different
theories. Research showed that molecules are able to combine in
different ways depending on the properties of the atoms in their
composition.

These bonds are very important for organic chemistry, which is the
chemistry of living beings, because the most important molecules
constituting life are formed due to their ability to form these bonds.
Let us take the example of proteins. The complex three-dimensional
shapes of proteins, which are the building blocks of living things, are
formed thanks to these bonds. This means that the weak chemical bond
between molecules is at least as necessary as the strong chemical bond
between atoms for the formation of life. Certainly, the strength of
these bonds must be of a certain measure.

We can continue with the protein example. Molecules called amino acids
combine to form proteins, which are much larger molecules. The atoms
forming amino acids are combined by covalent bonds. Weak bonds combine
these amino acids in such a way as to produce three-dimensional
patterns. Proteins can function in living organisms only if they have
these three dimensional patterns. Therefore, if these bonds did not
exist, neither would the proteins, or, therefore, life exist.

The "hydrogen" bond, a type of weak bond, plays a major role in the
formation of materials that bear great importance in our lives. For
instance, the molecules forming water, which is the basis of life, are
combined by hydrogen bonds.

A Miracle Molecule:Water

A liquid specifically chosen for life – "water" – covers two-thirds of
our earth. The bodies of all living beings on the earth are formed of
this very special liquid at a ratio ranging between 50%-95%. From
bacteria living in springs with temperatures close to the boiling point
of water, to some special mosses on melting glaciers, life is present
everywhere where there is water, no matter at what temperature. Even in
a single droplet hung on a leaf after rain, thousands of microscopic
living organisms emerge, reproduce, and die.

How would the earth look if there were no water? Certainly, everywhere
there would be desert. There would be abysses and horrific pits, in
place of seas. The sky would seem cloudless and have a strange colour.

In fact, it is extremely difficult for water, the basis of life on
earth, to form. First, let us imagine that hydrogen and oxygen
molecules, which are the components of water, are put in a glass bowl.
Let us leave them in the bowl for a very long time. These gases may
still not form water even if they remain in the bowl for hundreds of
years. Even if they do, it would not be more than a very small amount at
the very bottom of the bowl and that would happen in a very slow
fashion, maybe over thousands of years.

The reason why water forms so slowly under these circumstances is
temperature. At room temperature, oxygen and hydrogen react very slowly.

Oxygen and hydrogen, when free, are found as H2 and O2 molecules. To
combine to form the water molecule, they must collide. As a result of
this collision, the bonds forming the hydrogen and oxygen molecules
weaken, leaving no hindrance for the combination of oxygen and hydrogen
atoms. Temperature raises the energy and therefore, the speed of these
molecules, resulting in an increase in the number of collisions. Thus,
it accelerates the course of the reaction. However, currently, no
temperature high enough to form water exists on earth. The heat required
for the formation of water was supplied during the formation of the
earth, which resulted in the emergence of so much water as to cover
three quarters of the earth's surface. At present, water evaporates and
rises to the atmosphere where it cools and returns to the earth in the
form of rain. That is, there is no increase in the quantity; only a
perpetual cycle.

The Miraculous Properties of Water

Water has many exceptional chemical properties. Every water molecule
forms by the combination of hydrogen and oxygen atoms. It is quite
interesting that these two gases, one combustive and the other
combustible, combine to form a liquid, and most interestingly, water.

Now, let us briefly see how water is formed chemically. The electrical
charge of water is zero, that is, it is neutral. Yet, due to the sizes
of the oxygen and hydrogen atoms, the oxygen component of the water
molecule has a slightly negative charge and its hydrogen component has a
slightly positive charge. When more than one water molecule come
together, positive and negative charges attract each other to form a
very special bond called "the hydrogen bond". The hydrogen bond is a
very weak bond and it is incomprehensibly short-lived. The duration of a
hydrogen bond is approximately one hundred billionth of a second. But as
soon as a bond breaks, another one forms. Thus, water molecules adhere
tightly to each other while also retaining their liquid form because
they are combined with a weak bond.

Hydrogen bonds also enable water to resist temperature changes. Even if
air temperature increases suddenly, water temperature increases slowly
and, similarly, if air temperature falls suddenly, water temperature
drops slowly. Large temperature changes are needed to cause considerable
changes in water temperature. The significantly high thermal energy of
water has major benefits for life. To give a simple example, there is a
great amount of water in our bodies. If water adapted to the sudden
vicissitudes of temperature in the air at the same rate, we would
suddenly develop fevers or freeze.

By the same token, water needs a huge thermal energy to evaporate. Since
water uses up a great deal of thermal energy while evaporating, its
temperature drops. To give an example, again from the human body, the
normal temperature of the body is 360 C and the highest body temperature
we can tolerate is 420 C. This 60 C interval is indeed very small and
even working under the sun for a few hours can increase body temperature
by that amount. Yet, our bodies spend a great amount of thermal energy
through sweating, that is, by causing the water it contains to
evaporate, which in turn causes body temperature to drop. If our bodies
did not have such an automatic mechanism, working for even a few hours
under the sun could be fatal.

Hydrogen bonds equip water with yet another extraordinary property,
which is water's being more viscous in its liquid state than in its
solid state. As a matter of fact, most substances on earth are more
viscous in their solid states than in their liquid states. Contrary to
other substances, however, water expands as it freezes. This is because
hydrogen bonds prevent water molecules from bonding to each other too
tightly, and thus many gaps are left in between them. Hydrogen bonds are
broken down when water is in liquid state, which causes oxygen atoms to
come closer to each other and form a more viscous structure.

This also causes ice to be lighter than water. Normally, if you melt any
metal and throw in it a few solid pieces of the same metal, these pieces
would sink directly to the bottom. In water, however, things are
different. Icebergs weighing ten thousands of tons float on water like
corks. So, what benefit can this property of water provide us?

Let us answer this question with the example of a river: When the
weather is very cold, it is not the whole river, but only the surface of
it that freezes. Water reaches its heaviest state at + 40 C, and as soon
as it reaches this temperature, it immediately sinks to the bottom. Ice
is formed on top of water as a layer. Under this layer, water continues
to flow, and since + 40 C is a temperature at which living organisms can
survive, life in water continues.

These unique properties which Allah has given water make life possible
on the earth. In the Qur'an, Allah states the importance of this great
blessing He offers man:

It is He Who sends down water from the sky. From it you drink and from
it come the shrubs among which you graze your herds. And by it He makes
crops grow for you and olives and dates and grapes and fruit of every
kind. There is certainly a Sign in that for people who reflect. (Surat
an-Nahl: 10-11)

An Interesting Property of Water

We all know that water boils at 1000 C and freezes at 00 C. In fact,
under normal circumstances, water should be boiling not at 1000 C but at
+ 1800 C. Why?

In the periodic table, the properties of elements in the same group vary
in a progressive form from light elements towards heavy elements. This
order is most evident in hydrogen compounds. The compounds of the
elements sharing the same group with oxygen in the periodic table are
called "hydrides". In fact, water is "oxygen hydride". Hydrides of other
elements in this group have the same molecular structure as the water
molecule.

The boiling points of these compounds vary in a progressive way from
sulphur to heavier ones; however, the boiling point of water
unexpectedly goes against this pattern. Water (oxygen hydride) boils at
800 C less than it is supposed to. Another surprising situation has to
do with the freezing point of water. Again, according to the order in
the periodic system, water is supposed to freeze at – 1000 C. Yet, water
breaks this rule and freezes at 00 C, 1000 C above the temperature at
which it is due. This brings to mind the question as to why no other
hydride, but only water (oxygen hydride) disobeys the rules of the
periodic system.

The laws of physics, the laws of chemistry, and all the other things we
name as rules are just attempts at explaining the extraordinary
equilibrium in the universe, and the details of creation. All research
conducted in the 20th century shows more than ever that all the physical
balances in the universe are tailor-made for human life. Research
reveals that all the laws of physics, chemistry and biology prevalent in
the universe as well as the atmosphere, sun, atoms and molecules, etc.,
are all arranged just as they are needed in order to support human life.
Water, like the other elements mentioned above, is fit for life to such
a degree as not to be comparable to any other liquid, and a major
portion of the earth is filled with water in just the right amounts
required for life. It is obvious that all these cannot be coincidences
and that there is perfect order and design prevalent in the universe.

The staggering physical and chemical properties of water reveal that
this liquid has been created specially for human life. Allah gave life
to people through water and by it has brought forth from the earth
everything they need in order to live. Allah summons people to think
about this subject in the Qur'an:

It is He Who sends down water from the sky from which We bring forth
growth of every kind, and from that We bring forth the green shoots and
from them We bring forth close-packed seeds, and from the spathes of the
date palm date clusters hanging down, and gardens of grapes and olives
and pomegranates, both similar and dissimilar. Look at their fruits as
they bear fruit and ripen. There are Signs in that for people who
believe. (Surat al-An'am: 99)

The Protective Ceiling: Ozone

The air we breathe, that is, the lower atmosphere, is in the main
composed of oxygen gas. By oxygen gas, we mean O2. That is to say that
the oxygen molecules in the lower atmosphere are each comprised of two
atoms. However, the oxygen molecule may sometimes be comprised of three
atoms (O3). In this case, this molecule is no longer called oxygen, but
"ozone", because these two gases are quite different from each other.

One point needs mention here: while oxygen is formed when two oxygen
atoms combine, why is a different gas called ozone formed when three
oxygen atoms combine? Eventually, isn't it the oxygen atom that
combines, be it two or three atoms in a molecule? Why then do two
different gases emerge? Before answering these questions, it would be
better to see what differentiates these gasses from each other.

Oxygen (O2) is found in the lower atmosphere and gives life to all
living beings through respiration. Ozone (O3) is a poisonous gas with a
very bad smell. It is found in the highest strata of the atmosphere. If
we had to breathe ozone instead of oxygen, none of us would survive.

The ozone is in the upper atmosphere, because there it serves a highly
vital function for life. It forms a layer approximately 20 km above the
atmosphere surrounding the earth like a belt. It absorbs the ultraviolet
rays emitted by the sun, preventing them from reaching the earth at full
intensity. Since ultraviolet rays have very high energy, their direct
contact with the earth would cause everything on the earth to burn up,
never allowing life to form. For this reason, the ozone layer serves as
a protective shield in the atmosphere.

In order for life to exist on the earth, all living beings must be able
to breathe and be protected from harmful sunrays. The one who forms this
system is Allah, Who rules over each atom, each molecule. Without
Allah's permission, no power whatsoever could bring these atoms together
in different proportions as oxygen and ozone gas molecules.

Molecules We Taste and Smell

The senses of taste and smell are perceptions making man's world more
beautiful. The pleasure derived from these senses has been a matter of
interest since ancient times and it has been discovered only recently
that these are caused by molecular interactions.

"Taste" and "smell" are only perceptions that are created by different
molecules in our sense organs. For instance, the smells of food, drinks,
or various fruits and flowers we see around us all consist of volatile
molecules. So, how does this happen?

Volatile molecules like aroma of vanilla and aroma of rose reach the
receptors located on the vibrating hairs in the nasal region called the
epithelium and interact with those receptors. This interaction is
perceived as smell in our brains. So far, seven different types of
receptors have been identified in our nasal cavity, which is lined by a
smelling membrane of 2-3 cm2. Each one of these receptors corresponds to
a primary odor. In the same way, there are four different types of
chemical receptors in the front part of our tongue. These correspond to
salty, sweet, sour and bitter tastes. Our brains perceive molecules
arriving at the receptors of our sense organs as chemical signals.

It has been discovered how taste and smell are perceived and how they
are formed, yet scientists have so far not been able to reach agreement
as to why certain substances have a strong smell while some have less
and why some taste good and some bad.

Think for a minute. We could be living in a world without any flavour or
odour. Since we would have no idea about the concepts of taste and
fragrance, it would not even occur to us to wish to possess these
perceptions. However, it is not so. Out of the brown soil with a unique
smell come hundreds of types of aromatic and delicious fruits,
vegetables and flowers in thousands of colours, shapes and fragrances.
Why then do these atoms, which, on one hand, come together in an
extraordinary way to form matter, combine, on the other hand, to produce
taste and smell? Although we often take them as granted and do not
remember much what a great favour they are, they pleasantly contribute
to our world as products of a magnificent artistry.

As for other living beings, some eat only grass and some different
foodstuffs. Certainly, none of these smell good, or have a great taste.
Even if they do, this does not mean much for these living beings as they
do not have any consciousness in the sense that human beings have. We,
too, could be feeding on a single type of nutrition like them. Have you
ever thought how ordinary and tasteless your life would be if you had to
eat a single type of food all your life and drink only water? Therefore,
taste and smell, like all other blessings, are beauties Allah, possessor
of infinite grace and bounty, gave man in return for nothing. The
absence of even these two senses alone would make human life quite dull.
In return for all these blessings given to him, what falls to man is to
try to become a person with whom Allah would be pleased. In compensation
for this attitude, his Lord promises him an eternal life, which is
unlimitedly furnished with blessings far superior to those that are
presented to us on the earth as samples of delights to come in the
hereafter. However, the recompense of a life spent ungratefully,
heedlessly, and neglectful of Allah, will certainly be a just one:

And when your Lord announced: "If you are grateful, I will certainly
give you increase, but if you are ungrateful, My punishment is severe."
(Surah Ibrahim: 7)

How Do We Perceive Matter?

What we have told so far has revealed that what we call matter is not an
entity having a specific colour, smell and form, as we believed it to
be. What we imagine to be matter, that is our own body, our room, our
home, and at large, the world and the whole universe, is in reality
nothing but energy. What is it then that makes everything around us
visible and touchable?

The reason why we perceive the things around us as matter is the
collision of electrons in the orbital shells of atoms with photons, and
the atoms' attracting and repelling each other.

You are not even touching the book that you think you hold in your hand
right now… In truth, the atoms of your hand are repelling the atoms of
the book and you feel a sense of touch depending on the intensity of
this repulsion. As we mentioned while talking about the structure of
atoms, they can come close to each other at most as much as the diameter
of an atom. Besides, the only atoms that can come this close are those
that react with each other. Therefore, when even atoms of the same
substance can by no means touch each other, it is all the more
impossible for us to touch the substance we hold, squeeze or lift with
our hand. In fact, if we could come as close as possible to the object
in our hand, we would be involved in a chemical reaction with that
object. In this case, it would be impossible for a human being or
another living being to survive even for a second. The living being
would immediately react with the substance on which he stepped, sat or
leaned, and be transformed into something else.

The final picture that emerges in this situation is extremely
remarkable: we live in a world that is 99.95 % composed of a void filled
with atoms consisting almost entirely of energy.37 We actually never
touch the things we say, "we touch and we hold". So, to what extent do
we perceive the matter we see, hear or smell? Are these substances
really as we see or hear them? Absolutely not. We had addressed this
point when we talked about electrons and molecules. Remember, it is
literally impossible for us to see the matter we believe to exist and
see, because the phenomenon we call seeing comprises certain images
formed in our brain by photons coming from the sun, or from another
light source, hitting the matter, which absorbs a certain portion of the
incoming light, and gives out the rest, which therefore is re-emitted
from the matter and strikes our eyes. That is to say that the matter we
see only consists of the information carried by photons that are
reflected to our eye. So, how much of the data related to matter is
conveyed to us by this information? We have no proof that the original
forms of the matters existing outside are fully reflected to us.

CHAPTER 4

ATOMS THAT COME ALIVE

**U**p to here, we talked about atoms and how matter is created out of
nothing. We said that atoms are the building blocks of everything
whether animate or inanimate. It is important to note that atoms are
building blocks of animate organisms as well as inanimate objects. Since
atoms are inanimate particles, it is extremely astonishing for them to
be the building blocks of living beings. This is also an issue
evolutionists can never explain.

Just as it is impossible to imagine pieces of stone coming together to
form living organisms, so is it impossible to imagine inanimate atoms by
themselves coming together to form living organisms. Think about a lump
of rock and a butterfly; one is inanimate, the other is animate. Yet,
when we delve into their essences, we see that both are made up of the
same sub-atomic particles.

The following example may be more explanatory regarding the
impossibility of inanimate matter transforming by itself into animate
matter: can aluminium fly? No. If we mix aluminium with plastic and
gasoline, can it fly? Of course it still cannot. Only if we bring
together these materials in a way so as to form an airplane, can they
fly. So, what makes an airplane fly? Is it the wings? The engine? The
pilot? None of these can fly by themselves. In fact, an airplane is
manufactured by the assemblage in a special design of different pieces
each of which has no ability to fly. The ability to fly is derived
neither from aluminium, nor plastic, nor gasoline. The specifications of
these substances are important, but the ability to fly can only be
gained by bringing these substances together in a very special design.
Living systems are no different. A living cell is formed by the
arrangement of inanimate atoms in a very special design. Faculties of
living cells, such as growth, reproduction and others, are results of
perfect design rather than the properties of molecules. The design we
find at this point is only Allah's creating the living from the dead:

Allah is He Who splits the seed and kernel. He brings forth the living
from the dead, and produces the dead out of the living. That is Allah,
so how are you perverted? (Surat al-An'am: 95)

Only Allah, the Almighty and the Wise can give life to an inanimate
substance, that is, create a living being. Living systems have such
complex structures that it is still not fully understood how they
operate despite the technological facilities available today.

However, there is a reality that is understood by the help of the
science that made outstanding progress accompanied by a powerful
technology that advanced in a devastating way in the 20th century.
Living beings have extremely complex structures. When the theory of
evolution was advanced in the middle of the 19th century, scientific
research conducted with primitive microscopes had then created the
impression that the cell was just a simple lump of matter. In the 20th
century, however, observation and research made by the use of advanced
instruments and electron microscopes revealed that the cell, which is
the building block of living things, has an extremely complex structure
that could only have been formed as a result of perfect design. Most
importantly, this research showed that it is absolutely impossible for
life to arise spontaneously out of inanimate matter. The source of life
is life alone. This fact has been proved experimentally, too.38 This is
a problem evolutionists can never resolve. For this reason, instead of
presenting scientific evidence, renowned evolutionary scientists, who
are at a great impasse, tell tales which amount to nothing but
window-dressing. They put forward totally illogical and unscientific
claims that matter has a consciousness, ability and will of its own.
Yet, they themselves do not believe these absurd tales either and they
are eventually forced to confess that the main questions that need to be
answered cannot be answered scientifically:

There was once a time before our life, when the Earth was barren and
utterly desolate. Our world is now overflowing with life. How did it
come about? How, in the absence of life, were carbon-based organic
molecules made? How did the first living things arise? How did life
evolve to produce beings as elaborate and complex as we, able to explore
the mystery of our own origins?39

The outstanding evolutionary mystery now is how matter has originated
and evolved, why it has taken its present form in the universe and on
the earth, and why it is capable of forming itself into complex living
sets of molecules.40

As the evolutionary scientist above confesses, the basic purpose of the
theory of evolution is to deny that Allah created living beings.
Although the Truth of Creation is obvious at every point of the universe
and it has been definitively shown that each detail is the product of a
design too perfect to have come about coincidentally, evolutionists turn
a blind eye to this fact and flounder in intellectual vicious circles.

Instead of believing this truth, however, evolutionary scientists prefer
talking about the talents of dead matter and how inanimate bodies have
transformed themselves into animate organisms. While closing their eyes
to the truth, these scientists unknowingly put themselves to shame. It
is obvious that claiming that atoms have some kind of a gift and that
they use this gift to transform themselves into animate systems has
nothing to do with reason.

After reading the example we will now quote, you will decide for
yourself how realistic these irrational tales are. This is the scenario
evolutionists claim, describing the transformation of inanimate and
unconscious atoms into animate organisms, and most significantly, into
people with high levels of consciousness and intelligence.

After the Big Bang, atoms, containing precisely balanced forces, somehow
brought themselves into being. While some of the atoms, adequate in
number to form the whole universe, formed the stars and the planets, and
some others the earth. Some of the atoms making up the earth initially
formed the land and later on, suddenly decided to form living beings\!
These atoms first transformed themselves into cells with highly complex
structures and then produced copies of the cells they formed by
splitting into two, after which they started speaking and hearing.
Subsequently, these atoms transformed into university professors viewing
themselves under the electron microscope and claiming that they came
into being coincidentally. Some atoms came together to form civil
engineers who construct bridges and skyscrapers, while some others came
together to manufacture satellites, space crafts and yet others
specialised in the disciplines of physics, chemistry and biology. Atoms
like carbon, magnesium, phosphorus, potassium and iron came together to
form, instead of a dark mass, perfect brains of exceptional complexity,
the secrets of which have not yet been fully unravelled. These brains
started seeing 3-dimensional images with a perfect resolution never yet
achieved by any technology. Some of the atoms formed comedians and
laughed at the jokes comedians made. Again, some atoms composed music
and enjoyed listening to it.

It is possible to prolong this story but let us stop here and run an
experiment to show that such a story can never be realised. Let
evolutionists put atoms, as much as required of all elements forming
life, into a barrel. Let them add in this barrel whatever they think
necessary for these atoms to unite to form organic matter, and then let
them wait. Let them wait for 100 years, 1000 years, and if necessary,
for 100 million years transferring responsibility to wait from father to
son. Will a professor emerge out of this barrel one day? Certainly not.
Regardless of how long they wait, a professor will not come out of this
barrel. Not only will there be no professor, but not even a single
living being would come out of this barrel. No birds, fishes,
butterflies, apples, elephants, roses, strawberries, oranges, violets,
trees, ants, honeybees, nor even a single mosquito would come out,
because even if millions of pieces of organic matter came together, they
would not spontaneously acquire the characteristics of a living being.

Now, let us see whether unconscious atoms can spontaneously form the DNA
molecule, the cornerstone of life, and proteins.

DNA (Deoxyribonucleic Acid), which is located in the nucleus of the
cell, contains the codes carrying the information of all organs and all
characteristics of the body. DNA, which contains all information on the
living being it belongs to, is also able to reproduce itself. How a
molecule formed by the assemblage of atoms can contain information and
how it multiplies by copying itself remain one of the unanswered
questions.

Proteins are the buildings blocks of living beings and they play a key
role in many vital functions of the organism. For instance, haemoglobin
transports oxygen everywhere in our body, antibodies render harmless
microbes entering the body, and enzymes help us to digest the food we
eat and convert it into energy. The formulae found in our DNA enable the
manufacture of 50,000 different types of proteins. As is obvious,
proteins are highly crucial for the survival of a living being and the
absence of even one of these proteins would make life impossible for
that living being. It is scientifically impossible for DNA and proteins,
each a giant molecule, to be formed spontaneously as a result of sheer
coincidence.

DNA is a series of nucleotides arranged in a special sequence. A protein
is a series of amino acids arranged again in a special sequence. First
of all, it is mathematically impossible for either DNA molecules or
protein molecules that come in thousands of different types to sort out
the appropriate sequences necessary for life by chance. Probabilistic
calculations reveal that the probability of even the simplest protein
molecules achieving the right sequence by chance is zero. (For more
information, see the book *The* *Evolution Deceit* by Harun Yahya). In
addition to this mathematical impossibility, there is also an important
chemical obstacle to the coincidental formation of these molecules. If
the relationship between DNA and protein were a result of time, chance,
and natural processes, then there would be some sort of chemical
tendency towards DNA and protein to react, as acids and bases have a
great tendency to react. In that case, if chance had really played a
role, sugar-acid, aminephosphoric acid, and a whole host of other
natural chemical reactions would occur among any random fragments of DNA
and protein and the living beings we see today would not form.

Does this natural tendency of DNA and protein fragments to react
chemically, then, suggest that time, chance, and the laws of chemistry
would eventually produce life from some mixture of these molecules? No.
Just the opposite. The problem is that all these natural chemical
reactions are the wrong reactions as far as living systems are
concerned. Left to time, chance, and their own chemical tendencies, DNA
and protein react in ways that destroy a living system and would prevent
any postulated development of life.41

As seen, it is absolutely impossible for DNA and proteins, which can by
no means form randomly, to be left uncontrolled to form life following
their own formations. Jean Guitton, a contemporary philosopher,
addressed this impossibility in his book titled *Dieu et la Science*
(God and Science), stating that life could not have formed as a result
of coincidences:

Following which 'coincidence' did certain atoms draw near each other to
form the first molecules of amino acids? Again, through which
coincidence did these molecules come together to form this extremely
complex structure called DNA? I am asking this simple question just like
the biological scientist François Jacob did: Who prepared the plans of
the first DNA molecule to give the first message that led to the birth
of the first living cell?

If one is satisfied with assumptions involving coincidences, these
questions – and many others – remain unanswered; this is why, for the
last few years, the biologists began to change their views. Top
researchers are not satisfied by re-telling Darwin's laws without
thinking, parrot-fashion; they put forward new surprising theories.
These are theories based on the idea that an organizing principle that
is apparently superior to matter is involved in the process.42

As Jean Guitton stated, science has reached such a point, in the light
of research and scientific discoveries made in the 20th century, that it
has been scientifically established that Darwin's theory of evolution
has no validity whatsoever. American biologist Michael Behe addresses
this in his famous book *Darwin's Black Box*:

Science has made enormous progress in understanding how the chemistry of
life works, but the elegance and complexity of biological systems at the
molecular level have paralysed science's attempt to explain their
origins. There has been virtually no attempt to account for the origin
of specific, complex biomolecular systems, much less any progress. Many
scientists have gamely asserted that explanations are already in hand,
or will be sooner or later, but no support for such assertions can be
found in the professional science literature. More importantly, there
are compelling reasons – based on the structure of the systems
themselves – to think that a Darwinian explanation for the mechanisms of
life will forever prove elusive.43

Just as the entire universe was created from nothing, so were living
beings created from nothing. Just as only nothing can come into
existence out of nothing by chance, inanimate matter cannot combine by
chance to form living beings. Only Allah, Possessor of infinite power,
infinite wisdom and infinite knowledge, has power to do all these:

Your Lord is Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth in six days
and then settled Himself firmly on the Throne. He covers the day with
the night, each pursuing the other urgently; and the sun and moon and
stars are subservient to His command. Both creation and command belong
to Him. Blessed be Allah, the Lord of all the worlds. (Surat al-A'raf:
54)

CHAPTER 5

POWER OF THE ATOM

**W**e now know how atoms, the building blocks of the whole universe and
everything therein, animate-inanimate, form matter in an extraordinary
way. As we have examined, these extremely minute particles have a
perfect organisation within themselves. Yet, the miraculous aspect of
the atom does not end there; the atom also houses tremendous energy.

While the power hidden in the atom serves humanity on one hand, it poses
an extremely great danger for humanity on the other hand. So much so
that by the misuse of this power, tens of thousands of people lost their
lives in a very short time– a few seconds – at Hiroshima and Nagasaki
during World War II. In recent years, an accident that took place in the
Chernobyl nuclear power plant in Russia caused the death or injury of a
great number of people.

Before giving detailed information on the disasters the power of the
atom caused in Hiroshima, Nagasaki and Chernobyl, let us take a short
look at the nature of this power in the atom and how it is released.

Power Hidden in the Nucleus

In the chapter titled "The Formation Adventure of the Atom", we had said
the force keeping the protons and neutrons together in the atomic
nucleus is "the strong nuclear force". The enormous power of nuclear
energy is revealed by the liberation of a tiny part of this force in the
nucleus. The magnitude of this energy varies depending on the type of
the element, because the number of protons and neutrons in the nucleus
of each element is different. As the nucleus grows, the number of
neutrons and protons and the magnitude of the force bonding them to each
other increase. It is extremely difficult to release this force that is
responsible for keeping protons and neutrons together in a large
nucleus. As the particles grow more distant from each other, they, just
like a taut bow, try to come together with greater force.

Before going into the details of this force, let us think it over. How
can such an enormous force fit in such a small place? This is such a
force that it has been discovered after years of research conducted by
thousands of people. When it is not interfered with, it does not do any
harm to anyone, yet, with the intervention of man, it may at any time
become a force killing millions.

Two technical processes called "fission" and "fusion" release this
extraordinary force in the nucleus of the atom, which may endanger the
lives of millions of people. The reaction known as fission is a nuclear
reaction in which an atomic nucleus splits into fragments, and the
reaction called fusion is the bringing together of two nuclei by a great
force. In either reaction, a tremendous amount of energy is released.

Fission

Fission is a nuclear reaction in which the atomic nucleus, which is held
together by the strongest force in the universe, the "Strong Nuclear
Force", splits into fragments. The main material used in fission
experiments is "uranium" because the uranium atom is one of the
heaviest. In other words, there are plenty of protons and neutrons in
its nucleus.

In fission experiments, scientists shot a neutron at the uranium nucleus
at great velocity. They faced a very interesting situation. After the
neutron was absorbed by the uranium's nucleus, the uranium nucleus had
become very unstable. The nucleus' being "unstable" means the formation
of a difference between the numbers of protons and neutrons in the
nucleus, resulting in an imbalance in its structure. Therefore, the
nucleus starts splitting into fragments while emitting a certain amount
of energy to eliminate this imbalance. The nucleus, under the impact of
the energy released, starts ejecting the components it contains at great
velocity.

Considering the results these experiments yielded, neutrons were
accelerated and uranium was bombarded with neutrons in special
environments called "reactors". However, uranium is bombarded with
neutrons according to a very fine measure, not randomly, because any
neutron bombarding the uranium atom has to hit the uranium immediately
and at the desired point. That is why these experiments are conducted
taking every probability into consideration. The amount of the uranium
to be used, the amount of the neutrons used to bombard the uranium, and
the duration and speed at which the neutrons will bombard the uranium
should all be very precisely calculated.

After all these calculations are made and the appropriate setting is
prepared, the nucleus is bombarded with neutrons in such a way that they
penetrate the nuclei of the atoms in the uranium. It is sufficient that
the nucleus of at least one of the atoms in this mass is split in two.
In this division, an average of two or three neutrons are sent out from
the mass of the nucleus at great velocity and high energy. Neutrons that
are released start a chain reaction by colliding with other uranium
nuclei within the mass. Each newly split nucleus behaves like the
initial uranium nucleus. Thus, a chain of nuclear reactions starts. A
large number of uranium nuclei are split into fragments as a result of
these chain reactions, causing an enormous amount of energy to be
released.

It was these nuclei divisions that have caused the Hiroshima and
Nagasaki disasters, causing the death of tens of thousands of people. At
the moment of the detonation of the atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima by
the United States in 1945 during World War II, and in its aftermath,
approximately 100,000 people died. Another atom bomb dropped on Nagasaki
by America three days after the Hiroshima disaster caused the death of
another 40,000 people right at the moment of detonation. While the power
released by the nuclei caused the death of many people, it also
destroyed a very large residential area, and gave rise to many
irreparable genetic and physiological disorders in the remaining
residents of that area, due to the radiation released, which was to
affect generations to come.

If our earth, the whole atmosphere, everything animate and inanimate
including us, are composed of atoms, what prevents atoms from being
involved in nuclear reactions like the ones in Hiroshima and Nagasaki,
that could occur anytime and anywhere?

The neutrons are created in such a way that, when they are free in
nature – without being linked to a nucleus – they are subjected to a
decomposition called "beta decay". Because of this disintegration, no
neutrons wander freely in nature. Therefore, neutrons that are to be
used in nuclear reactions must be obtained through artificial methods.

This makes clear that, Allah, the Creator of the entire universe,
created everything with a precise measure. If neutrons had not
decomposed in the free state, the earth would be nothing but an
uninhabitable spherical celestial body where endless nuclear reactions
took place. Allah created the atom along with this colossal power within
it and keeps this power under control in a phenomenal way.

Fusion

Nuclear fusion, just the contrary of fission, is the process of bringing
together two light nuclei to form a heavier nucleus and using the
bonding energy thus released. However, to achieve this in a controlled
fashion is very difficult. This is because nuclei carry positive
electrical charges and repel each other very strongly if forced to come
together. Therefore, a force strong enough to overcome the repulsive
force between them must be used to make them fuse. This required kinetic
energy is equivalent to a temperature of 20-30 million degrees.44 This
is an extraordinarily high temperature and although researchers have
been trying for years to produce a stable fusion reaction that produces
more power than it consumes, they have not been successful so far.

Fusion reactions take place in the sun all the time. The heat and light
coming from the sun is the result of hydrogen being fused into helium
and energy being released in place of the matter lost during this
conversion. Each second, the sun converts 564 million tons of hydrogen
to 560 million tons of helium. The remaining 4 million tons of matter is
converted into energy. This tremendous event producing the solar energy
that is extremely vital for life on our planet, has continued for
millions of years without pause. This may bring to our minds such a
question: If such a great amount of matter as 4 million tons is lost in
the sun each second, when will the sun be fully consumed?

The sun loses 4 million tons of matter per second, 240 million tons per
minute. If we assume that the sun has been producing energy at this rate
for 3 billion years, the mass it has lost during this period would be
400,000 million times million tons, which is equal to one 5,000th of the
current total mass of the sun. This amount is like one gram of sand
being lost out of a 5 kilogram rock in 3 billion years. As this makes
clear, the mass of the sun is so enormous that a very long time has to
pass before it is finished.

Man has only discovered the composition of the sun and the events taking
place inside it this century. Earlier, no one ever knew about phenomena
such as nuclear explosions, fission or fusion. Nobody knew how the sun
produced energy. Yet, while man was unaware of all these, the sun always
continued to be the energy source of the earth and life, for millions of
years with this incredible mechanism.

Now, the really curious thing is that our earth has been placed at such
an exact distance from the sun – a source of energy possessing an
enormous mass – that it is neither exposed to its scorching, destructive
power, nor deprived of the useful energy it provides. In the same way,
the sun, which possesses such enormous power and energy, is created at
the distance, with the power and the size which are perfect for all life
on earth, and foremost, man.

This gigantic mass and the incredible nuclear reactions occurring in it
have been carrying on their activities for millions of years in perfect
harmony with the earth and in the most controlled manner. To understand
what an extraordinary, controlled and balanced system this is, it is
good enough to remember that man is incapable of controlling even one
simple nuclear power plant he has established. No scientist, no
technological equipment was able to prevent the nuclear accident that
occurred in the Chernobyl reactor in Russia in 1986. It is said that the
impact of this nuclear accident will endure for 30-40 years. Although
scientists have covered around the contaminated sections of the reactor
with enormously thick concrete to prevent further damage, it was later
reported that there were leaks from the concrete. Let alone nuclear
explosions, even nuclear leaks are extremely dangerous for human life,
and science is helpless against this threat.

At this point, we stand facing Allah's endless power and His sovereignty
over each particle (atom) in the universe and the sub-atomic particles
inside this particle (protons, neutrons…). Allah's power and sovereignty
over the beings He creates are stated in a verse as follows:

You do not engage in any matter or recite any of the Qur'an or do any
action without Our witnessing you while you are occupied with it. Not
even the smallest speck eludes your Lord, either on earth or in heaven.
Nor is there anything smaller than that, or larger, which is not in a
Clear Book. (Surah Yunus: 61)

Effects of the Atomic Bomb: Hiroshima and Nagasaki

The atomic bombs dropped in the final year of World War II have revealed
to the whole world the tremendous power hidden in the atom. Both bombs
caused hundreds of thousands of people to lose their lives and inflicted
lifelong physical damage on many of the survivors.

Although the impact of the explosion depends on the power of the bomb
and various environmental conditions, let us see, based on the example
of Nagasaki and Hiroshima, how the enormous power inside the atom,
causing the deaths of hundreds of thousands of people in a few seconds,
is released second by second:

**- The moment of explosion…**

Let us assume that an atomic bomb explodes at an altitude of 2,000 m as
it did in Hiroshima and Nagasaki. The neutrons bombarding the uranium
and which split the first atoms into fragments creates chain reactions
within the mass as mentioned before. In other words, the neutrons thrown
out from the first fragmented nuclei hit other nuclei and split these
new nuclei as well. Thus, all nuclei are rapidly fragmented in a chain
reaction and the explosion occurs in a very short time. Neutrons move so
fast that the bomb releases a total energy of 1,000 billion
kilo-calories during one millionth of a second.

The temperature of the gas, into which the bomb is instantaneously
converted, rises to several million degrees and the gas pressure rises
to one million atmospheres.

**- One thousandth of a second after the explosion…**

The diameter of the detonated mass of gas increases and various rays are
emitted. These radiations form the "initial flash" of the explosion.
This flash may cause full blindness in anyone standing within an area
having a diameter of tens of kilometres. This flash is hundreds of times
stronger than that emitted from the surface of the sun (per surface
unit). The time elapsed since the outset of the explosion is so short
that people close to the explosion site cannot even find time to close
their eyes.

The pressure of the shock causes heavy damage indoors. Power
transmission towers, two-piece bridges and skyscrapers built from
glass-steel are also damaged. In the close surroundings of the
explosion, a great amount of powder-like fine dust is raised.

**- 2 seconds after the explosion…**

The flashing mass and the air surrounding it form a fireball. The heat
radiated from this fireball, whose surface is still extremely hot and
which glows like the sun and even more, is powerful enough to ignite all
combustible matter within an area of 4-5 kilometres in diameter. The
radiance of the fireball may cause irreparable damage to the sense of
vision. At this moment, a shock wave moving at very great speed develops
around the fireball.

**- 6 seconds after the explosion…**

At this point, the shock wave hits the earth and causes the first
mechanical damage. The wave creates powerful air pressure, the intensity
of which decreases as one goes farther from the centre of the explosion.
Even around 1.5 km away from this point, the added pressure is twice as
strong as normal atmospheric pressure. The chance of people staying
alive at this pressure is 1%.

**- 13 seconds after the explosion…**

The shock wave diffuses along the surface of the earth and it is
followed by the explosion created by the repositioning of the air sent
by the fireball. This explosion diffuses along the earth at a speed of
300-400 km per hour.

In the meantime, the fireball has cooled down and its volume has
decreased. Being lighter than air, it starts to rise. This upward motion
causes the direction of wind on the earth to reverse and causes a strong
wind to start blowing towards the centre, even though it was initially
blowing outwards from the centre of the explosion.

**- 30 seconds after the explosion…**

As the fireball rises, its spherical shape is distorted and it takes the
appearance of a mushroom.

**2 minutes after the explosion…**

The mushroom shaped cloud has now reached an altitude of 12,000 metres.
This is the lower limit of the stratospheric layer of the atmosphere.
The winds blowing at this altitude cause the mushroom shaped cloud to
disperse and the components of the cloud (mostly radioactive remains) to
scatter into the atmosphere. As these radioactive remains consist of
very tiny particles, they may rise to higher layers in the atmosphere.
Before falling on the earth, these remains may be made to travel several
times around the earth by the winds blowing in the upper layers of the
atmosphere. Thus, radioactive remains may be dispersed all over the
world.

Radiation Emitted By the Atom

Radiation consists of gamma rays, neutrons, electrons and similar
sub-atomic particles moving at very high speeds such as 200,000 km per
second. These particles may easily penetrate the human body and harm the
cells forming the body. This damage may cause a fatal cancer or, if it
takes place in reproductive cells, it may give rise to genetic disorders
that will influence generations to come. Therefore, the results of a
radioactive particle hitting a human being are very serious.

Radiation released in atomic explosions affects living beings either
directly or through the products of radioactive decay that emerge during
the explosion.

As one of these particles or rays travels at high speed in matter, it
collides very strongly with atoms or molecules that get in its way. This
collision may be a disaster for the delicate structure of the cell. The
cell may die, or, even if it recovers, it may start to grow in an
uncontrolled fashion – which is cancer – perhaps weeks, months, or years
later.

Radiation is very intense in an area of 1,000 metres in diameter around
the centre of the explosion. Those who survive other fatal factors lose
almost all white cells in their blood, wounds appear on their skins, and
all of them die because of haemorrhages in a short period of time from a
few days up to two or three weeks. The effect of radiation on those
farther from the point of explosion varies. Those who are exposed to
these harmful rays emitted by the fireball at distances of 13, 16, and
22 km suffer from third, second, and first degree burns respectively.
Digestive problems and haemorrhages are experienced less, but real
disorders appear later: hair loss, skin burns, anaemia, sterility,
miscarriages, giving birth to crippled or deformed babies. In these
cases, too, death is possible within a period from ten days to three
months. Even years later, sight disorders, leukaemia and radiation
cancer may develop. One of the greatest dangers of hydrogen bomb
explosions (another nuclear bomb of enormous destructive power caused by
the fusion of the nuclei of various hydrogen isotopes in the formation
of helium nuclei) is the entrance of radioactive dust into the body
through respiration, digestion and the skin. This dust causes the
above-mentioned disorders depending on the degree of contamination.

All these are caused by atoms, which we cannot even see with our eyes.
Atoms can form life just as they can destroy it. This property of the
atom shows us very clearly how helpless we are and how superior is
Allah's power.

With your body made up of atoms, you are breathing atoms in the air,
eating atoms in food and drinking atoms of water. What you see is
nothing other than the collision of electrons of the atoms in your eye
with photons. And what about what you feel by touch? The sensations are
simply formed by atoms in your skin repelling atoms of objects.

Indeed, almost everyone knows today that his body, the universe, the
world, in short, everything consists of atoms. Yet, perhaps, most people
so far never thought about what kind of a system the entity we call the
atom has. Or, even if they did, they did not feel the need to
investigate it, because they always thought this concerns physicists
alone.

Man, however, lives entwined within this perfect system throughout his
life. This is such a system that every one of the trillions of atoms
forming the armchair on which we sit has an order about which a book
could be written. It takes pages to tell the formation, the system and
the power of a single atom. As the technology advances and our knowledge
of the universe increases, these pages also increase.

How then did this order form? It cannot be that the atoms came into
being by themselves in the wake of the Big Bang and then an appropriate
environment was formed by chance, and these atoms combined randomly to
form the elements that comprised the universe. It is certainly
impossible to explain such a system by "chance". Everything you see
around you, and even the air you cannot see, consist of atoms, and there
is a very complex traffic between these atoms.

Who then can direct the traffic between the atoms? Can it be you? If you
think that your body consists of atoms alone, then which one of your
atoms directs which, and which atom directs what? Do the atoms of your
brain that are no different from other atoms control the others? If we
assume that the atoms of your brain are directors, then we have to
answer these questions:

\* If all atoms forming the brain are directors, how and based on what
do they make their decisions?

\* How do trillions of atoms forming the brain cooperate?

\* Why does not a single atom out of trillions of them oppose the
decision that is taken?

\* How do the atoms communicate with each other?

Considering the above questions, it is obviously an illogical deduction
to say that all of the trillions of atoms forming the brain are
directors.

So, can it be correct to think that only one of these trillions of atoms
is the director and the others are its followers? If we believe a single
atom to be the director, then the questions that come to the mind are:

\* Which atom is the director and who elected this atom?

\* Where in the brain is this atom?

\* What is the difference of this atom from the others?

\* Why do the other atoms obey this atom unconditionally?

Before answering these questions, let us state one more thing: the
supposed director atom is also made up of other particles. Why and under
what pretext do these particles come together to form this director
atom? Who controls these particles? Since there is another will
directing these particles, how right would it be to defend that this
atom is the director?

At this point, the claim that one of the atoms forming our brain may be
the director atom is inevitably disproved. How do the countless number
of atoms in the universe continue their existence in full harmony, while
people, animals, plants, earth, air, water, objects, planets, space, and
everything else are made of atoms? Which one of these countless atoms
can be the director when it itself is made up of many sub-particles? To
make such a claim or to attribute everything to chance and to deny the
being of Allah, Who created all the worlds, is only **"rejecting those
signs in iniquity and arrogance in spite of their own certainty about
them."** (Surat an-Naml: 14)

Just think: a human being, who is made up of the arrangement of atoms in
various combinations, is born, is fed with atoms and grows up with
atoms. He then reads books made of atoms in a building made of atoms.
Later, he receives a diploma composed of atoms that says "nuclear
engineer" on it. Yet, he can still come and deliver speeches such as
"these atoms have come together as a result of sheer coincidence, and
the extraordinary system within them has formed by chance". If this is
so, where does he derive the consciousness, will and intelligence to
deliver this speech?

In almost every page of this book, we saw repeatedly that it is
impossible for the atom making up every animate or inanimate thing in
the universe, to be itself formed by chance. What we will say to those
who, despite all we have told, still think that this phenomenon has come
about by "chance" or taken its present form through the mechanism of
"trial and error" will be no different from what the prophet Ibrahim,
peace be upon him, said to the disbelievers:

What about the one who argued with Ibrahim about his Lord, on the basis
that Allah had given him sovereignty? Ibrahim said, 'My Lord is He who
gives life and causes to die.' He said, 'I too give life and cause to
die.' Ibrahim said, 'Allah makes the sun come from the East. Make it
come from the West.' And the disbeliever was dumbfounded. Allah does not
guide wrongdoing people. (Surat al-Baqara: 258)

NOTES

1\. David Filkin, *Stephen Hawking's Universe:The Cosmos Explained*,
Basic Books, October 1998, pp. 85-86

2\. *Stephen Hawking's A Brief History of Time A Reader's Companion*
(Edited by Stephen Hawking; prepared by Gene Stone), New York, Bantam
Books, 1982, p. 62-63

3\. Henry Margenau, Roy Abraham Vargesse, *Cosmos, Bios, Theos*, La
Salla IL: Open Court Publishing, 1992, p. 241

4\. H. P. Lipson, "A Physicist Looks at Evolution", *Physics Bulletin*,
vol. 138, 1980, p. 138

5\. Taşkın Tuna, *Uzayın Sırları* (The Secrets of Space), Boğaziçi
Yayınları, p.185

6\. Colin A. Ronan, *The Universe Explained*, The Earth-Dwellers's Guide
to the Mysteries of Space, Henry Holt and Company, pp. 178-179

7\. Taşkın Tuna, *Uzayın Sırları* (The Secrets of Space), Boğaziçi
Yayınları, p.186

8\. Steven Weinberg, *The First Three Minutes, A Modern View of the
Origin of the Universe*, Basic Books, June 1993, p. 87

9\. Stephen W. Hawking, *A Brief History of Time,* Bantam Books, April
1988, p. 121

10\. Hugh Ross, *The Creator and the Cosmos*, *How Greatest Scientific
Discoveries of the Century Reveal God*, Colorado: NavPress, Revised
Edition, 1995, p. 76

11\. Michael Denton, *Nature's Destiny:How The Laws of Biology Reveal
Purpose in the Universe*, The New York: The Free Press, 1998, pp. 12-13

12\. Paul Davies, *The Accidental Universe*, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1982, Foreword

13\. Jean Guitton, *Dieu et La Science:Vers Le Métaréalisme*,
Paris:Grasset, 1991, p. 62

14\. Jean Guitton, *Dieu et La Science:Vers Le Métaréalisme*,
Paris:Grasset, 1991, p. 62

15\. Jean Guitton, *Dieu et La Science:Vers Le Métaréalisme*,
Paris:Grasset, 1991, p. 62

16\. Ümit Şimşek, *Atom* (The Atom), Yeni Asya Yayınları, p.7

17\. Taşkın Tuna, *Uzayın Ötesi* (Beyond Space), Boğaziçi Yayınları,
1995, p. 53

18\. Jean Guitton, *Dieu et La Science:Vers Le Métaréalisme*,
Paris:Grasset, 1991, p. 62

19\. Taşkın Tuna, *Uzayın Ötesi* (Beyond Space), Boğaziçi Yayınları,
1995, p. 52

20\. David Filkin, *Stephen Hawking's Universe:The Cosmos Explained*,
Basic Books, October 1998, pp. 143-144

21\. Richard Feynman, *The Character of Physical Law*, The M.I.T. Press,
March 1967, p. 128

22\. Richard Feynman, *The Character of Physical Law*, The M.I.T. Press,
March 1967, p. 129

23\. Jean Guitton, *Dieu et La Science:Vers Le Métaréalisme*,
Paris:Grasset, 1991, p. 5

24\. Martin Sherwood & Christine Sulton, *The Physical World*, Oxford
University Press, 1988, p. 81

25\. Martin Sherwood & Christine Sulton, *The Physical World*, Oxford
University Press, 1988, p. 82

26\. Martin Sherwood & Christine Sulton, *The Physical World*, Oxford
University Press, 1988, p. 79

27\. L. Vlasov, D. Trifonov, *107 Stories About Chemistry*, 1977, p. 117

28\. L. Vlasov, D. Trifonov, *107 Stories About Chemistry*, 1977, p. 118

29\. David Burnie, *Life*, Eyewitness Science, London: Dorling
Kindersley, 1996, p.8

30\. Nevil V. Sidgwick, *The Chemical Elements and Their Compounds*,
vol.1, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1950, p.490

31\. Martin Sherwood & Christine Sulton, *The Physical World*, Oxford
University Press, 1988, p. 30

32\. *Structure of Matter*, The Time Inc. Book Company, 1992, p. 76

33\. P.W. Atkins, *Molecules*, Scientific American Library, p. 115

34\. P.W. Atkins, *Molecules*, Scientific American Library, p. 128

35\. P.W. Atkins, *Molecules*, Scientific American Library, p. 130

36\. P.W. Atkins, *Molecules*, Scientific American Library, p. 93

37\. Taşkın Tuna, *Uzayın Ötesi* (Beyond Space), Boğaziçi Yayınları,
1995, p. 166

38\. Henry M. Morris, Impact No. 111, Septemberl 1982

39\. Carl Sagan, *Cosmos*, Random House, April 1983, p. 24

40\. C.D. Darlington, *Evolution for Naturalists*, (NY, John Wiley,
1980) p. 15

41\. Dr. Gary Parker, Impact No: 62, August 1978

42\. Jean Guitton, *Dieu et La Science:Vers Le Métaréalisme*,
Paris:Grasset, 1991, p. 38

43\. Michael Behe, *Darwin's Black Box*, Free Press, 1996, p.x

44\. Théma Larousse, *Tematik Ansiklopedi Bilim ve Teknoloji*
(Encyclopedia of Science and Technology), p. 300

**BACK COVER**

With your body made up of atoms, you are breathing atoms in the air,
eating atoms in food and drinking atoms of water. What you see is
nothing other than the collision of electrons of the atoms in your eye
with photons. And what about what you feel by touch? The sensations are
simply formed by atoms in your skin repelling atoms of objects.

Indeed, almost everyone knows today that his body, the universe, the
world, in short, everything consists of atoms. Yet, perhaps, most people
so far never thought about what kind of a system the entity we call the
atom has. Or, even if they did, they did not feel the need to
investigate it, because they always thought this concerns physicists
alone.

Man, however, lives entwined within this perfect system throughout his
life. This is such a system that every one of the trillions of atoms
forming the armchair on which we sit has an order about which a book
could be written. It takes pages to tell the formation, the system and
the power of a single atom.

In this book, the implausibility of the spontaneous formation of an
atom, the building-block of everything, living or non-living, is related
and the flawless nature of Allah's creation is demonstrated.

**ABOUT THE AUTHOR**

The author, who writes under the pen-name Harun Yahya, was born in
Ankara in 1956. He studied arts at Istanbul’s Mimar Sinan University and
philosophy at Istanbul University. Since the 1980s, the author has
published many books on political, faith-related and scientific issues.
Harun Yahya is well-known as an author who has written very important
works disclosing the forgery of evolutionists, the invalidity of their
claims and the dark liaisons between Darwinism and bloody ideologies.
Some of the books of the author have been translated into English,
German, French, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, Albanian, Arabic, Polish,
Russian, Bosnian, Indonesian, Turki, Tatar, Urdu and Malay and published
in the countries concerned. Harun Yahya’s books appeal to all people,
Muslims and non-Muslims alike, regardless of their age, race, and
nationality, as they center around one goal: to open the readers’ mind
by presenting the signs of God’s eternal existence to them.

Also by Harun Yahya

Many people think that Darwin's Theory of Evolution is a proven fact.
Contrary to this conventional wisdom, recent developments in science
completely disprove the theory. The only reason Darwinism is still
foisted on people by means of a worldwide propaganda campaign lies in
the ideological aspects of the theory. All secular ideologies and
philosophies try to provide a basis for themselves by relying on the
theory of evolution.

This book clarifies the scientific collapse of the theory of evolution
in a way that is detailed but easy to understand. It reveals the frauds
and distortions committed by evolutionists to "prove" evolution. Finally
it analyzes the powers and motives that strive to keep this theory alive
and make people believe in it.

Anyone who wants to learn about the origin of living things, including
mankind, needs to read this book.

VIDEO FILMS AND AUDIO CASSETTES

BASEDONTHEWORKS OF HARUN YAHYA

The works of Harun Yahya are also produced in the form of documentary
films and cassettes, which are available as VHS, VCD or DVD. This page
includes some of these documentaries.

Audio presentations based on the works of Harun Yahya are produced in
the form of tape-cassettes. The titles in this series include The Theory
of Evolution The Fact of Creation, The Creation of the Universe/The
Balances in the Earth, The Miracle in the Cell/The Miracle of Birth, The
Miracle in the Eye/The Miracle in the Ear, The Design in Animals/The
Design in Plants, The Miracle in the Honeybee/The Miracle in the Ant,
The Miracle in the Mosquito/The Miracle in the Spider, Self-Sacrifice in
Living Things/Migration and Orientation, The Miracle of Creation in DNA,
Miracles of the Qur'an.

HARUN YAHYA ON THE INTERNET

www.harun-yahya.net

www.islamdenouncesantisemitism.com

www.islamdenouncesterrorism.com

www.secretbeyondmatter.com

If you would like to purchase the books of Harun Yahya, please visit
www.bookglobal.net

www.bookglobal.net

www.miraclesofthequran.com

www.jesuswillreturn.com

www.endoftimes.net

www.darwinismrefuted.com

www.darwinism-watch.com

www.palestiniantragedy.com

www.theprophetmuhammad.org

www.perishednations.com

www.riseofislam.com

www.evolutiondeceit.com

www.globalfreemasonry.com

www.eastturkestan.net

www.creationofuniverse.com

www.servingislam.com

www.signsofthelastday.com

www.truthsforkids.com

www.islamandkarma.com

www.islamandbuddhism.com

www.bbcrefuted.com

www.freebookcenter.net

www.insight-magazine.com

www.evolutiondocumentary.com

www.evidencesofcreation.com

www.unionoffaiths.com

www.theistsunited.com

www.noblequran.info

